THE TAOIST EXPERIENCE 

AN ANTHOLOGY 

Livia Kohn 


STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK PRESS 



The translation from the Yufang bijue in Section 20 is closely adapted from 
The Art of the Bedchamber: The Chinese Sexual Yoga Classics Including 
Womens Meditation Texts, by Douglas Wile, copyright 1992 by State Uni¬ 
versity of New York Press. Used by permission. 

The translations from the Zuowanglun in Section 31 and from the Cunshen 
lianqi ming in Section 43 are taken from Seven Steps to the Tao: Sima 
Chengzhen’s Zuowanglun, by Livia Kohn, copyright 1987 by Monumenta 
Serica. Used by permission. 

The translation from the Neiguan jing in Section 22 is reprinted from Taoist 
Meditation and Longevity Techniques, ed. Livia Kohn, copyright 1987 by the 
University of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies. Reprinted by permission. 

The translation of the Jiude song in Section 40 is reprinted from Early 
Chinese Mysticism: Philosophy and Soteriology in the Taoist Tradition, by 
Livia Kohn, copyright 1992 by Princeton University Press. Reprinted by 
permission. 

Published by 

State University of New York Press, Albany 
©1993 State University of New York 
All rights reserved 

Printed in the United States of America 

No part of this book may be used or reproduced 
in any manner whatsoever without written permission 
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in 
critical articles and reviews. 

For information, address State University of New York 
Press, State University Plaza, Albany, N.Y, 12246 

Production by Diane Ganeles 
Marketing by Dana E. Yanulavich 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Kohn, Livia, 1956- 

The Taoist experience : an anthology / Livia Kohn. 

p. cm.—(SUNY series in Chinese philosophy and culture) 

Includes bibliographical references. 

ISBN 0-7914-1579-1 (alk. paper).—ISBN 0-7914-1580-5 (pbk. : 
alk. paper) 

1. Taoism—China. 1. Title. 11. Series. 

BL1910.K64 1993 

299.514—dc20 92-32933 

CIP 

10 987654321 



CONTENTS 


Introduction 


1 


Part One: The Tao 


Chapter One. The Tao 11 

1. The Tao That Can’t Be Told/13 

2. The Tao in the World/19 

3. Pure and Tranquil/24 

4. Ineffable Knowledge/29 

Chapter Two. Creation 33 

5. Scriptures Create the Universe/35 

6. Numinous Treasure—Wondrous History/43 

7. The Lands of the Immortals/48 

8. Gods and Goddesses/55 

Chapter Three. The Teaching 63 

9. The Three Caverns/65 

10. The Transformations of Laozi/71 

11. The Path/80 

12. The Way to Complete Perfection/86 

Part Two: Long Life 

Chapter Four. Discipline 95 

13. Precepts and Prescriptions/97 

14. Protective Measures/106 

15. How To Be Taught/116 

16. Passing the Test/119 


V 



VI 


Contents 


Chapter Five. Physical Practices 133 

17. Breathing for Life/135 

18. Gymnastics/141 

19. Drugs and Diets/148 

20. Sexual Techniques/153 

Chapter Six. The Cosmic Body 161 

21. The Structure of the Body/163 

22. The Body As the World/168 

23. The World in the Body/174 

24. The Gods Within/181 

Part Three: Eternal Vision 

Chapter Seven. The One 191 

25. Lights in the Body/193 

26. The True One/197 

27. The Three Ones/204 

28. One in All/215 

Chapter Eight. Insight Practice 221 

29. Two Kinds of Observation/223 

30. Energies and Elixirs/229 

31. Observing Life/235 

32. Glimpses of the New Mind/241 

Chapter Nine. Ecstatic Excursions 249 

33. The Far-off Journey/251 

34. Trips through the Stars/257 

35. Divine Loves/267 

36. Ecstatic Sleep/271 

Part Four: Immortality 

Chapter Ten. Immortal Personality 279 

37. The Perfected/281 

38. To Be a Sage/285 

39. Magical Powers/290 

40. The Virtue of Wine/299 



Contents 


vii 

Chapter Eleven. Ascension 303 

41. Alchemical Transformation/305 

42. The Inner Elixir/313 

43. Gradual Dissolution/318 

44. Eyewitness Accounts/325 

Chapter Twelve. Immortal Life 333 

45. Celestial Garb/335 

46. The Administration of Heaven/343 

47. Sojourn Among Mortals/351 

48. Feasting in Paradise/358 

List of Chinese Texts Translated 365 

Bibliography 367 

Index 381 



INTRODUCTION 


What is Taoism? Is it a degenerate form of a highly sophisti¬ 
cated ancient philosophy? Is it an organized form of popular reli¬ 
gion? Or has it nothing much to do with either? 

Is Taoism found mostly in a messianic movement of mass sal¬ 
vation that began in the second century c.E.? Is it most essentially 
present in the elaborate performance of majestic rituals of renewal 
and ancestral salvation? Or, again, is it found first of all in the 
leisurely play of immortals, sitting under pine trees, sipping elixirs 
of immortality? 

Is Taoism a political force, developed and supported by the 
imperial court for its own ends? Or is it the physical retention of 
youth, the attainment of longevity and health in the body? Is it, in 
the end, maybe just an unstructured mass of beliefs, doctrines, and 
practices that have changed from century to century, from school to 
school, even from believer to believer? 

Taoism, of course, is all these things and none of them. It is an 
unknown and enigmatic, yet pervasive and ubiquitous aspect of 
Chinese, even East Asian, religion and culture. It is a force that 
has influenced Eastern thinking like few others; it is an organized 
religion, a philosophy, and also the attitude that individuals have 
toward their lives and the world. 

Taoism plays a central part in the development of East Asian 
culture, and yet it is not a religion in our sense that can be easily 
defined in terms of founder, doctrines, pantheon, practices, and 
scriptures. Only the latter are relatively well delineated through 
the corpus of the Taoist canon, published in 1445, and its various 
supplements. Still, even there confusion prevails. 

Most of the materials are undated and do not contain clear 
references to an author or sectarian affiliation. Many documents 
contained in the canon come from non-Taoist traditions, such as 


1 



2 


Introduction 


ancient philosophers or works on divination. And even within the 
texts that can be identified in terms of lineage and roughly dated, 
beliefs, doctrines, and deities appear in an apparently incoherent 
jumble, mixing Buddhism and Confucianism, Chinese medicine and 
divination, alchemy and shamanism into a wondrous and multifac¬ 
eted combination. 

The study of Taoism in recent years has done much to unravel 
its doctrinal intricacies and historical developments, making in¬ 
roads into the complexity of the religion from a variety of different 
angles. Methodologically centered on the philological study of texts 
and the identification of historical context, Taoist studies has made 
enormous progress, and the full complexity of the religion has come 
to be appreciated. 

This progress is reflected in recent publications; several new 
histories of Taoism have appeared (Seidel 1990, Robinet 1991); a 
number of specialized bibliographies are available now (Loon 1984, 
Thompson 1985, Boltz 1987, Pas 1988, Dragan 1989; for earlier 
lists, see Soymie 1968 and 1969); a survey of the development of 
Taoist studies in the West has come out (Seidel 1990a), and there is 
even a journal devoted entirely to its study (Taoist Resources, Indi¬ 
ana University). 

However, there is as yet no scholarly presentation of Taoist 
texts in Western languages. There is no textbook that makes the 
materials of the religion easily accessible to students of religion 
and the interested lay reader. This volume, an anthology contain¬ 
ing altogether about sixty translations from a large variety of Tao¬ 
ist texts, is a step toward filling this lacuna. It is meant as an easy 
and yet thorough introduction to the major concepts, doctrines, and 
practices of Taoism, presenting the philosophy of the ancients as 
much as the practices and ideas of Taoists today. 

The organization of the work follows the Taoist path. It begins 
with the Tao, the most fundamental power of the Taoist universe, 
and its role in the creation of the heavens and the world. Moving 
on to an outline of the overall teaching, the work then divides 
according to the three distinct stages of long life, eternal vision, 
and immortality. “Long life and eternal vision” is the way in which 
the Daode jing already describes the central concern for the Tao. 
The two terms distinguish physical and meditational practices, lon¬ 
gevity and spiritual attainment. 

Still, however ancient the distinctions, however clear and inte¬ 
grated the organization, any systematic description of the Taoist 
path can never do justice to the actual experience of the religion. 



Introduction 


3 


The way of the Tao is always a totality. Unravelled into sentences, 
transposed into the linear nature and logical structure of language, 
divided into chapters and sections, it can only be a mere shadow, a 
trace of itself, a pointer to its essence. Although presented as a 
logical succession, it must be understood that the concepts and 
practices described in actual reality are interwoven and mingled in 
a highly complex way. They are not to be followed in as simple and 
linear a manner as their presentation may suggest. 

The texts translated below are selected from many different 
periods and cover all the major schools of the religion (see below). 
They are texts chosen because they are most suitable to demon¬ 
strate certain concepts and doctrines and illuminate most clearly 
certain practices. They are not necessarily the most classic of Tao¬ 
ist texts, nor do they represent the historical development of the 
religion. Rather, the documents are assembled here in order to 
provide a phenomenological approach to Taoism, to convey a sense 
of identity and being in the world that is particular to this religion 
as opposed to all others. 

About eighty percent of the selections are taken from the 
Taoist canon of 1445, with the remainder chosen from later supple¬ 
ments to the canon, from Taoist manuscripts discovered at 
Dunhuang, and from literary sources. They are all given in the 
rendering of the author, with about half translated here for the 
first time. Introductions to individual sections describe the con¬ 
cept or practice at hand, provide some data on the text, and con¬ 
tain references for further reading. The references are strictly 
limited to works in Western languages, with preference given to 
materials in English whenever available. Translations are geared 
toward readability more than toward technical detail. The num¬ 
bering system for texts from the Taoist canon follows K. M. 
Schipper, Concordance du Tao Tsang: Titres des Ouurages (Paris, 
1975). For a conversion to the Harvard-Yenching Index, see Boltz 
1987. 

A summary of the major dates and events that punctuate the 
history of Taoism helps to put the materials presented below into a 
general historical perspective. 

Taoism as a religion began in the year 142 c.e. with the revela¬ 
tion of the Tao to Zhang Daoling by the personified god of the Tao, 
Taishang laojun, the Highest Venerable Lord. This deity is the Tao, 
but also a mythological development of the ancient philosopher 
Laozi. He appears also as Huanglaojun, the Yellow Venerable Lord, 



4 


Introduction 


a title that indicates the close association of Laozi with the Yellow 
Emperor in the centuries preceding the revelation. 

Zhang Daoling, by virtue of this divine endowment, became the 
first Celestial Master and founder of the first organized Taoist school, 
called Orthodox Unity or Celestial Masters after his title. Still con¬ 
tinuing the tradition, the sixty-fourth Celestial Master resides today 
in Taiwan. The school is a form of communal religion, with a heavy 
emphasis on morality, ritual, purifications, and exorcism. 

There were various precursors of this first organized school of 
Taoism. First, in terms of doctrine, there were the ancient philoso¬ 
phers of the Tao, Laozi and Zhuangzi with their major works Daode 
jing (Scripture of the Tao and the Virtue) and Zhuangzi (fourth and 
third centuries b.c.e.). Describing the world as created and sup¬ 
ported by the Tao, encouraging people to pursue simplicity and 
spiritual cultivation in order to recover and realize this all-encom¬ 
passing force, and developing the ideal of the sage and the perfect 
human being, these works furnished the conceptual framework for 
the later religion. Also, the Daode jing became its first sacred scrip¬ 
ture, to be recited at regular intervals and to almost magical pur¬ 
poses (see Seidel 1969). 

Second, in terms of practice, there were the magico-technicians 
ifangshi) of the Former Han dynasty (206-6 b.c.e.), a group of 
ascetics and wandering healers who strove for personal refinement 
and immortality. They were mainly known for their expertise in a 
variety of arts: forms of divination, such as astrology, physiognomy, 
numerology, milfoil analysis after the Yijing (Book of Changes), 
dream interpretation, etc.; medical techniques, such as acupunc¬ 
ture, moxibustion, pharmacology, dietetics, and the like; shamanis- 
tic practices, such as purifications, exorcisms, travels to the other 
world, and spirit mediumship. Using these methods, the goal of the 
magico-technicians was to attain immortality, a longevity in the 
body and a free spiritual access to the world of the gods and spirits. 
They were in many ways the earliest active Taoists in Chinese 
history (see DeWoskin 1983). 

Third, in terms of organization, there were a number of similar 
messianic movements and religious groups that emerged around 
the beginning of the Common Era. Driven by the increasingly dis¬ 
astrous political and economic situation at the time and inspired by 
the belief in the utopian realm of Great Peace, thousands of people 
took to the roads, numerous revelations of texts and sacred talis¬ 
mans were received by gifted visionaries, and again and again 
rebellions against the existing order had to be quelled—as for 



Introduction 


5 


example the big insurrection of the Yellow Turbans or Tao of Great 
Peace in 184. The Celestial Masters, far from being a special and 
unique movement at the time, were one among many, different 
mainly in that they did not get quite as deeply involved in political 
disputes and somehow managed to survive (see Levy 1956, Seidel 
1969a). 

The first Taoist movement thus combined in its foundation the 
ancient worldview of the Taoist philosophers, the practices of the 
magico-technicians of the Former Han, and the messianic, 
millenaristic dimensions of the popular cults of the Later Han. 
Successive Taoist schools, usually inspired by further and new rev¬ 
elations from the heavens, continued with the same combination, 
emphasizing different aspects in accordance with the times and 
circumstances of their emergence. 

The second major Taoist school was the school of Highest Clar¬ 
ity (Shangqing). It began with a revelation from the Heaven of High¬ 
est Clarity received by the medium Yang Xi in 364-70. Yang Xi was 
a member of a southern aristocratic clan, and the new scriptures 
and insights into the realms of the otherworld transmitted to him 
remained at first limited to this select group. Highest Clarity in its 
teaching combined the new visions with the practices of the magico- 
technicians as they were continued in the south and specifically 
associated with a family named Ge. Shangqing practice was highly 
individual and aimed at transferring the practitioner into the realms 
of the immortals, first by visualizations, then by ecstatic journeys, 
and finally through the ingestion of a highly poisonous alchemical 
elixir (see Strickmann 1978 and 1981, Robinet 1984). 

A few decades after the Shangqing revelations, Ge Chaofu, a 
member of the Ge family, proceeded to develop his own vision of the 
otherworld. Calling his new understanding Numinous Treasure 
(Lingbao), he integrated the Highest Clarity scriptures with Han- 
dynasty thinking, Buddhist cosmology and doctrine, as well as the 
magico-technical practices transmitted within his family. The new 
group of scriptures, compiled from the last decade of the fourth 
century onward, soon became widespread and very popular. Much 
simpler than the practice of Highest Clarity, Numinous Treasure 
required merely the recitation of its scriptures and participation in 
its rites to guarantee a place among the perfected. Since only ini¬ 
tiates were allowed to own the necessary documents and join the 
ceremonies, the group placed a high emphasis on secrecy and the 
proper transmission of the scriptures (see Bokenkamp 1983, Seidel 
1983). 



6 


Introduction 


With the Lingbao movement spreading, Taoism emerged for 
the first time as an organized religion of all China, expanding 
vastly over the limited sphere of influence of the Celestial Masters. 
Copying readily from the fast-growing Buddhist community, Tao- 
ists in the fifth century built the first monasteries of their own, 
compiled their first catalogues and canons of scriptures, and estab¬ 
lished proper rank and file among their membership. Throughout 
the sixth century, scriptures continued to be received in revelation 
and compiled by human beings; commentaries and discourses grew. 
Soon also the first encyclopedias were collected, and there appeared 
the first statues and pictural representations of Taoist gods. 

The Tang dynasty (618-906) saw the heyday of Taoist splendor 
and influence. The leading church of China, especially in the eighth 
century, Taoism with Highest Clarity at the top continued to pro¬ 
duce scriptures, texts and art works and gained an ever increasing 
influence on the political scene of the day. The great splendor of 
courtly Taoists was matched by the high spiritual attainments of 
masters on isolated mountains. The widespread impact throughout 
the country was enhanced by the political support of the Tang 
rulers, who claimed descent from Laozi himself (see Kohn 1987, 
Benn 1991). 

The rebellion of An Lushan in 755 was the beginning of a great 
break in the fortunes and development of the religion as well as in 
all of Chinese culture, a hiatus which ended only with the founding 
of the Song dynasty in 960. Turning their eyes on the origins of 
Chinese greatness, thinkers and practitioners in the following cen¬ 
turies placed a strong emphasis on the teachings of Confucius and 
on integrating all the various strands of their heritage lost in two 
centuries of disorder. The “harmonization of the three teachings” of 
Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism was the order of the day and 
main guideline for the development of new Taoist doctrine. At the 
same time, the evolving practice of inner alchemy integrated all 
the various earlier techniques into a highly sophisticated complex 
under an umbrella of alchemical and divinatory symbolism (see 
Baldrian-Hussein 1984, Needham et al. 1983). 

Many new Taoist schools sprang up, especially in the twelfth 
century under the Southern Song, a period of great political dis¬ 
tress due to the conquest of the north by the Central Asians but 
also a time of rapid modernization and new economic developments. 
Most important among them was Complete Perfection (Quanzhen), 
a monastic and ascetic school that emphasized the integration of 
the three teachings and the practice of inner alchemy. Supported 



Introduction 


7 


by the Yuan (Mongol) rulers, Complete Perfection attained a posi¬ 
tion of high influence which it has maintained until the present. In 
fact, the monastic group of Complete Perfection and the communal 
school of the Celestial Masters are the two surviving forms of Tao¬ 
ism today (see Tsui 1991). 

In the first decades of the twentieth century, Taoism was a 
colorful mixture of the monastic, communal, and individual, a fas¬ 
cinating combination of spiritual, ritual, and shamanistic practices. 
Much of this has been destroyed in the People’s Republic and is 
only making a slow and rather hesitant comeback, though many 
ancient techniques are popular again under the shield of medical 
practice (see Goullart 1961, Blofeld 1973, Pas 1990). 



Part One 




Chapter One 


THE TAO 


The Tao is what gave Taoism its name, both the ancient 
philosophy and the later religion; the Tao is their most fundamen¬ 
tal concept, what occupies the place of the sacred in their very 
center. 

The Tao is ineffable and beyond human comprehension; thus it 
is spoken about as nameless, formless, and obscure, with the help 
of contradictory metaphors and paradoxes. To speak about the Tao 
is, in fact, to “tao” it—something that cannot possibly succeed, yet 
has to be continuously attempted if there is to be a teaching in its 
name. 

The Tao, if we then try to grasp it, can be described as the 
organic order underlying and structuring and pervading all exist¬ 
ence. It is organic in that it is not willful, but it is also order 
because it changes in predictable rhythms and orderly patterns. If 
one is to approach it, reason and the intellect have to be left be¬ 
hind. One can only intuit it when one has become as nameless and 
as free of conscious choices and evaluations as the Tao itself. 

The Tao cannot be described in ordinary language, since lan¬ 
guage by its very nature is part of the realm of discrimination and 
knowledge that the Tao transcends. Language is a product of 
the world; the Tao is beyond it—however pervasive and omnipres¬ 
ent it may be. The Tao is transcendent and yet immanent. It cre¬ 
ates, structures, orders the whole universe, yet it is not a mere part 
of it. 

Crucial to the religious experience of Taoism, the Tao is al¬ 
ways there yet has always to be attained, realized, perfected. It 
creates the world and remains in it as the seed of primordial 
harmony, original purity, selfless tranquility. When outwardly 
active, it manifests as Virtue, an orderly, measurable power of 


11 



12 


The Tao 


vitality that supports and rectifies the world, pervading life with 
a hue of the Tao’s radiance deep within. Virtue can be practiced 
and followed, but only so far. Perfect Virtue is too close to the Tao 
itself to be fully practiced or understood. To realize it one must go 
truly beyond. 

All Taoism centers around the Tao and its Virtue, around the 
ever transforming power of vitality and its deep and dark yet bril¬ 
liant source. Different schools and traditions, down to individual 
practitioners, have understood and experienced this Tao and its 
Virtue differently, organizing their religious activities accordingly 
and building different theoretical frameworks for its comprehen¬ 
sion. There is no one Taoism and no one single Taoist experience. 
Yet there are patterns, manifestations, to be observed. Like the 
Tao, the experience is and and yet is not, remains hidden and only 
occasionally emerges from the shadows. 

The selections on the Tao are representative of varied ap¬ 
proaches to this difficult and most fundamental of all Taoist con¬ 
cepts. The four texts come from three different periods and schools 
and give an impression of four different approaches to the enigma 
of the Tao and its formulation in human language. 

First, the Daode jing (Scripture of the Tao and the Virtue) is 
the classic of all Taoism, the oldest and most important of its works. 
Dated to the third century b.c.e., it belongs to philosophical Taoism 
and represents the ancient philosophical and speculative view of 
the Tao. 

Second, the Daoti lun (On the Embodiment of the Tao) is a 
medieval (eighth century) exegesis of the ancient text, highly theo¬ 
retical and sophisticated, yet strongly informed by the beliefs of the 
religion and geared toward the needs of the religious practitioner. 
It stands for the scholastic approach to the Tao. 

Third, the Qingjing jing (Scripture of Purity and Tranquility) 
represents the liturgical formulation of the Tao. The text, originally 
from the Song dynasty (960-1260), has been and still is used in the 
ritual devotions of monastic Taoism. It is chanted regularly and 
represents a devotional attitude to the Tao. 

Fourth, then, the selection from the Zhuangzi, another text of 
philosophical Taoism that at the same time is recognized as China’s 
first major literary work, shows the Tao in a story, clarified by 
literary tales, by metaphors and narrative events. It represents 
another ancient angle, yet at the same time shows the literary and 
metaphorical approach to the Tao. 



1. The Tao That Can’t Be Told 


13 


1. The Tao That Can’t Be Told 

The Daode jing, known also as the Laozi after its alleged author, 
a philosopher of the sixth century b.c.e., is a short text of about five 
thousand characters. It is divided into eighty-one chapters and two 
major sections, dealing with the Tao and the Virtue respectively. 

Although the concepts expressed in the text are recognized as 
quite ancient, the actual document dates from approximately 250 
B.C.E. A manuscript copy from before 168 b.c.e. was found recently. 
Due to the rather legendary nature of its alleged author Laozi, the 
text is now assumed to consist of varied sayings of ancient masters, 
transmitted orally. Interpreted in many ways—politically, symboli¬ 
cally, as cultural criticism, allegory, popular sayings, etc.—the text 
in its religious reading has maintained a strong infiuence over 
Taoism for the past 2,500 years. 

English translations of the text abound—more than one hun¬ 
dred to date. Frequently used versions are, for example, Waley 1934, 
Bynner 1944, Lin 1948, Legge 1962, Chan 1964, LaFargue 1992. 
Translations of the recently excavated manuscript are found in Lau 
1982 and Henricks 1989. On the problems surrounding Laozi, see 
Fung and Bodde 1952, Seidel 1969, Kaltenmark 1969, Graham 1990. 
For commentaries of the text, see Ch’en 1981, Robinet 1977, Bergeron 
1986, Chan 1991, Wagner 1980, 1986, and 1989. 


Daode jing (Scripture of the Tao and the Virtue) 

The Tao that can be told 
Is not the eternal Tao. 

The name that can be named 
Is not the eternal name. 

t 

The nameless is the origin of heaven and earth; 
The named is the mother of the myriad beings. 

Always remain free from desires— 

And you can see its wonder. 

Always cherish desires— 

And you can only observe its outcome. 

Both these develop together 
But have different names; 

They are part of the mystery. 





14 


The Tao 


Mysterious and more mysterious— 

The gate of all that’s wondrous, (chap. 1) 


The Tao is empty. 

Use it, 

It will never overflow; 

Abysmal it is— 

The ancestor of all beings. 

Blunting blades, 

Opening knots. 

Joining light. 

Merging with dust. 

Profound it is— 

Like something eternal. 

I do not know. 

Whose child is it? 

Its appearance precedes the gods. (chap. 4) 


Heaven and earth are not benevolent. 

They take the myriad beings as mere straw dogs. 
The sage is not benevolent. 

He takes the hundred families as mere straw dogs. 

The space between heaven and earth. 

Isn’t it like a bellows? 

Empty, yet never bent; 

Active, yet reaching ever farther. 

Speak much, repeat again— 

No, much better to guard it in your midst! (chap. 5) 


The valley spirit does not die. 

It is called the mysterious female. 

The gate of the mysterious female 
Is called the root of heaven and earth. 

Forever and ever, it exists continuously. 

Use it, yet you’ll never wear it out. (chap. 6) 



1. The Tao That Can’t Be Told 


15 


Highest goodness is like water. 

It benefits the myriad beings 
And never contends. 

By never contending 
It is without fault. 

It rests in what the multitude disdain, 

Thus it is close to the Tao. 

Rest in goodness like you stand on the earth, 

Make your mind as good as the abyss is deep. 

Join goodness to become fully benevolent. 

Speak pure goodness for mutual trust. 

Be straight in goodness when you govern. 

Serve goodness as much as you can. 

Then you will move with goodness at all times, (chap. 8) 


Look at it and do not see it: 

We call it invisible. 

Listen to it and do not hear it: 

We call it inaudible. 

Touch it and do not feel it: 

We call it subtle. 

These three cannot be better understood. 

They merge and become one. 

Infinite and boundless, it cannot be named. 

It belongs to where there are no beings. 

It may be called the shape of no-shape. 

It may be called the form of no-form. 

Call it vague and obscure. 

Meet it, yet you cannot see its head. 

Follow it, yet you cannot see its back. 

Grasp the Tao of old and control existence now. 
Know the beginnings of old— 

And have a thread to the Tao. (chap. 14) 



16 


The Tao 


Attain utmost emptiness, 

Maintain steadfast tranquility. 

The myriad beings are alive, 

And I see thereby their return. 

All these beings flourish. 

But each one returns to its root. 

Return to the root means tranquility. 

It is called recovering life. 

To recover life is called the eternal. 

To know the eternal is called enlightenment. 

If you don’t know the eternal. 

You will fall into error and end in disaster. 

Know the eternal and forgive; 

Forgive and be altruistic. 

Be altruistic and embrace all; 

Embrace all and be like heaven. 

Be like heaven and merge with the Tao, 

One with the Tao, you will last long. 

You may die but will never perish, (chap. 16). 


Forgiveness of great virtue 
Flows from the Tao alone. 

The Tao may appear as a being. 

Yet is just vague, only obscure. 

Obscure it is! It is vague! 

In its midst, some appearance. 

Vague it is! It is obscure! 

In its midst, some being. 

Serene it is! It is profound! 

In its midst, some essence. 

True this essence, nothing but so true! 
In its midst, some trust. 



1. The Tao That Can’t Be Told 


17 


From the old to today 
Its name never vanished, 

To open the beginnings of all. 

How do I know what those beginnings are? 
From this alone, (chap. 21) 


There is a being, in chaos yet complete; 

It preceded even heaven and earth. 

Silent it is, and solitary; 

Standing alone, it never changes; 

It moves around, yet never ends. 

Consider it the mother of all-under-heaven. 

I do not know its name. 

To call it something, I speak of Tao. 

Naming its strength, I call it great. 

Great—that means it departs. 

Depart—that means it is far away. 

Far away—that means it will return. 

Therefore the Tao is great. 

Heaven is great. 

Earth is great. 

The king, too, is great. 

In this enclosure, there are these four greats. 
And the king rests as one of them. 

The king follows earth. 

Earth follows heaven. 

Heaven follows the Tao. 

The Tao follows only itself, (chap. 25) 


The Tao—eternal, nameless, simple. 
Although small. 

It is subject to neither heaven nor earth. 



18 


The Tao 


Kings and lords maintain it, 

And the myriad beings come to them. 

Heaven and earth are in harmony, 

And sweet dew falls. 

People do not order it. 

It is everywhere equally. 

First you control it, then names appear. 

Yet once there are names. 

Knowledge must arise of when to stop. 

Know when to stop 
And you will never perish. 

Compare how the Tao is in all-under-heaven 

To the converging of rivers and valleys 

Toward the great streams and endless oceans, (chap. 32) 


Great Tao—overflowing! 

Can be left and right! 

The myriad beings rely on it to be born. 

It never turns them away. 

Its merit, so perfect— 

Yet claims no fame for its existence. 

It clothes and nurtures the myriad beings— 
Yet claims no position as their chief 
Always free from desires— 

Call it small! 

The myriad beings return to it— 

And yet never make it their chief 
Call it great! 

To its very end 

It does not think itself great. 

Thus 

It can perfect its greatness, (chap. 34) 



2. The Tao in the World 


19 


2. The Tao in the World 

The Daoti lun (DZ 1035, fasc. 704) is a short scholastic treatise 
not studied or translated to date. It is commonly associated with 
Sima Chengzhen (647-735), the twelfth patriarch of Highest Clar¬ 
ity (Shangqing) Taoism at its height under Emperor Xuanzong of 
the Tang. Invited to court several times, Sima was the leading 
Taoist figure of his time. Several important works of his remain 
today, including the Zuowang lun (On Sitting in Oblivion) and the 
Fuqi jingyi lun (On the Essential Meaning of the Absorption of 
Energy). Both texts deal with Taoist practice, meditation and lon¬ 
gevity techniques. 

For more on Sima Chengzhen, see Kohn 1987, Engelhard! 1987 
and 1989. For a study of Taoist soteriology, see Kohn 1992. For 
other scholastic interpretations of the Daode jing, see Robinet 1977. 


Daoti lun (On the Embodiment of the Tao) 

Discussing Laozi’s Daode jing 

[la] The Tao is all-pervasive; it transforms all from the begin¬ 
ning. Virtue arises in its following; it completes all beings to their 
end. They thus appear in birth and the completion of life. In the 
world, they have two different names, yet fulfilling their activities, 
they return to the same ancestral ground. They are two and yet 
always one. 

They are two and yet always one. Therefore there is no Tao 
outside of the omnipresence of Virtue. There is no Virtue different 
from the completion of life through the Tao. They are one and still 
appear as two. 

The Tao is found in endless transformation and pervasive om¬ 
nipresence. Virtue shines forth in the completion of life and in 
following along. They are always one; they are always two. 

Two in one, they are all-pervasive. All-pervasive, they can yet 
be distinguished. Thus their names are the Tao and the Virtue. 

Question: You said, “The Tao is all-pervasive; it transforms all 
from the beginning.” Whose beginning does this refer to? 

Answer: The beginning of the inner natures of all beings. How 
do we know this? Because the text says, “Virtue arises in its follow¬ 
ing; it completes all beings to their end.” Thus we know, [lb] Inner 





20 


The Tao 


nature arises from the Tao. The outer body is brought forth by 
Virtue. 

Question: This being so, why then does the scripture say, “The 
Tao brings them forth. Virtue nurtures them”? 

Answer: They follow the root and rely on the prime, thus the 
text says, “the Tao brings them forth.” The body is established only 
gradually, thus the text speaks of “nurture.” 

Question: There is a root that lies at the beginning of inner 
nature. Does it have a name or is it nameless? 

Answer: Both. 

Question: If it is both, why then does the scripture say that the 
nameless is at the root of the myriad beings? Why does it not say 
that it has a name? 

Answer: The Tao is an expression for that which pervades all 
life. When something pervades all life, there are bound to be outer 
manifestations. Once there are such manifestations, one can name 
them. Therefore one can attach names to the Tao, but none of these 
names will ever be truly permanent. 

Indeed, the Tao embodies all, wide and encompassing; its mean¬ 
ing is not limited to one name. Today we use language to dispel its 
engulfing obscurity. But language only makes the rough outer mani¬ 
festations of the Tao appear more clearly. It is only by going beyond 
these that one can awaken to the wondrous depths. [2a] 

Question: The Tao is wide and encompassing. Is it the same or 
different from beings? 

Answer: The Tao is always there, yet eternally other. Beings need 
the Tao to embody themselves. At the same time, the Tao needs beings 
to embody itself Beyond the inherent oneness of all, there are good 
and evil, right and wrong, life and death, opposition and conformity. 

Compare it to a fish. The fish depends on water to live; it also 
depends on water to die. Similarly people depend on the earth to 
walk on; they depend on the earth to fall down on; and they depend 
on the earth to get up on. 

Question: The scripture says, “The Tao brings them forth. Vir¬ 
tue nurtures them.” It also says, “That which brings forth and 
nurtures beings is called the Mysterious Virtue.” First it says, the 
Tao brings them forth. Then it says. Virtue does so. How does this 
go together? 



Fig. 1. The Empty Tao and the Tao in the World. Source; 
Laojun bashiyi huan tushuo. 

Answer: When the text first says that the Tao brings them 
forth, it refers to the fact that beings first receive cosmic empower¬ 
ment from the very root of all existence. When it then says that 





22 


The Tao 


Virtue brings them forth, it indicates that afterwards beings re¬ 
ceive their concrete life and are duly shaped into separate entities. 
How do we know this is so? 

Yin and yang embody each other in harmony and engender 
manifold transformations. With the establishment of these trans¬ 
formations yang comes to predominate, just as ruler and minister 
jointly govern the world. When their task is fulfilled, they return to 
the primordial beginning. 

The embodiment of the myriad beings as concrete living enti¬ 
ties comes through Virtue. [2b] But in its ancestral roots, this goes 
all the way to the deepest ground [of the Tao]. 

The text says, “The Tao brings them forth.” What the Tao does 
in fact bring forth is the embodiment of chaos complete, the begin¬ 
ning that has no name. It structures and encompasses the myriad 
beings in their original state. Wondrous it is in the extreme, the 
tranquil center of all developments. 

Obscure it is, indistinct! One cannot say it is really there. Yet 
all beings are there, right in its midst! One cannot say it is not 
there either. Above it shines, yet there is no light. Below it hides, 
yet there is no darkness. Meet it and you cannot see its head; 
pursue it and you cannot see its back. 

None knows where it comes from; it cannot be investigated 
and searched out. It is shape without shape, image without being. 
It is a word that is no word, yet this wordless word fills the uni¬ 
verse. Through the Tao, bodies and names become apparent, and it 
separates the ordinary from the sagely. 

Indeed, the ordinary cannot awaken of themselves. They must 
accumulate outer impulses and painstakingly seek the omnipres¬ 
ent pervasion underlying all. The sagely thus do not abandon be¬ 
ings to themselves, but instead make use of favorable opportunities 
to establish the teaching. 

The opportunities of teaching are irregular; therefore a myriad 
differences arise. But they all have in common that they are mani¬ 
festations of the unifying harmony of all—the Tao and the Virtue. 

The Tao’s deepest roots lie in its omnipresent pervasion. Virtue 
most of all means spontaneous realization. In omnipresent perva¬ 
sion, there is no principle that is not pervaded. In spontaneous real¬ 
ization, there is no trait of inner nature that is not fully realized. 

Omnipresent pervasion has no name. Nameless, it can be affir¬ 
matively named. [3a] Spontaneous realization is nonrealization. 
Therefore its activity manifests and duly becomes known in appella¬ 
tions. Appellations thus contain the manifestations of active Virtue. 



2. The Tao in the World 


23 


In Virtue, diligent practice is foremost, affirmatively naming 
the originally nameless. In the Tao, diminishing daily is essential, 
diligently pursuing and practicing it. Without this practice, nothing 
can be achieved. 

Diminish and again diminish, and there will be no fetter that 
does not dissolve. As Tao and Virtue are both forgotten, one myste¬ 
riously joins beings and oneself in pervasive oneness. Thus one can 
be great and overflowing [like the Tao]. Remain moderate in its use 
and it will never be exhausted. 

So great, it has no beyond; so small, it has no within. Flowing 
and encompassing all, it changes and transforms, leaving nothing 
that is not done. 

Therefore the myriad beings, numerous and varied, in all their 
shapes and names, their actions and developments, always depend 
on the Tao and the Virtue. Thus they can complete themselves. 

The scripture says, “The Tao is the obscure background of the 
myriad beings.” Thus Laozi the Perfected lived in accordance with 
its manifestations and, under the Zhou dynasty [6th century b.c.e.J, 
revealed its mysterious aura in order to save the age. Thus he wrote 
about the Tao and the Virtue. He used these two names to establish 
the teaching. Thus we know that the teaching does not appear all by 
itself To appear in the world, it must have a foundation. 

Its first and foremost foundation lies with Laozi, the Old Child. 
As he was even before symbols and gods, he is called Old. As he 
goes along with the changes and transforms in ever new births, he 
is called Child. [3b] As he embodies the teaching in omnipresent 
pervasion, he is called the Tao. As he represents the perfect prin¬ 
ciple that never changes, he is called the Scripture. As he has 
arisen even before these four, he is called the Highest. Thus his 
name is Old Child; he is embodied in the Highest Scripture of the 
Tao. 


Question: What does chaos complete embody itself in? 

Answer: It embodies itself in empty nonbeing as well as in the 
myriad forms of being. 

Question: Chaos is empty nonbeing as well as the myriad forms 
of being. Now, is this embodiment of chaos the same or different 
from the Tao? 

Answer: It is both different and the same. 


Question: Please explain how this is so. 



24 


The Tao 


Answer: It is different because, when chaos assembles to ob¬ 
tain embodiment, it becomes apparent and is named the Tao. In its 
embodiment, chaos pervades all and can thus be named. This is 
because, in its pervasion, it accumulates and its different aspects 
are singled out. Then they can be identified. Thus we say, chaos is 
different from the Tao. 

But it is also the same, because the Tao is never separate from 
its omnipresent pervasion. When one tries to distinguish this per¬ 
vasion from chaos, there is no real division. Chaos assembles and 
pervades all. Thus we say, chaos is the same as the Tao. 

Question: So, you’re saying that chaos can pervade the myriad 
beings. Pervasion therefore is chaos. Chaos in turn is all beings. 
[4a] Chaos is the Tao. Therefore all beings are the Tao. Now, if 
there is no difference between all beings and the Tao, why then 
should one cultivate it? 

Answer: Pure cultivation makes up for the discrepancy, how¬ 
ever minor, between the root and its embodiment. It leads back to 
the original nonbeing beyond and above chaos. The meaning of 
cultivation must be carefully taught. It is certainly not at all like 
an investigation and analysis of embodiment. 

Question: Is chaos complete the same or different from the 
Great Emblem? 

Answer: It is both different and the same. How do we know 
this? The Great Emblem is called chaos complete. This is the name 
of its embodiment. But the actual meaning of this embodiment is 
something else again. Thus we know that it is different. 

Still, if the name is not distinguished from the appellation of 
this embodiment, then the name is also this very embodiment it¬ 
self When thus the embodiment has no other name than chaos, the 
name is in fact the embodiment. Thus we say they are the same. 


3. Pure and Tranquil 

The Qingjing jing (DZ 620, fasc. 341), translated here in full, is 
a short, verse-like text that rose to prominence in the Song dynasty 
(960-1260). It was especially popular with the monastic school of 
Complete Perfection (Quanzhen) Taoism, in whose centers it is still 
recited as part of the regular devotions today. 



3. Pure and Tranquil 


25 


The text serves to inspire the active practitioner and believer. 
It provides an easy handle on the realization of the Tao within the 
religious life. It is an exhortation to purity and meditation, a warn¬ 
ing against bad thoughts and deviant desires. Pious Taoists know 
this short and rhythmic text by heart. 

There is as yet no study of this text or of Taoist monastic 
liturgy. A recent translation with inner-alchemical commentary is 
found in Wong 1992. On the history and present circumstances of 
the Complete Perfection sect, see Yao 1980, Tsui 1991. 


Qingjingjing (Scripture of Purity and Tranquility) 

The Great Tao has no form; 

It brings forth and raises heaven and earth. 

The Great Tao has no feelings; 

It regulates the course of the sun and the moon. 

The Great Tao has no name; 

It raises and nourishes the myriad beings. 

I do not know its name— 

So I call it Tao. 

The Tao can be pure or turbid, moving or tranquil. 
Heaven is pure, earth is turbid; 

Heaven is moving, earth is tranquil. 

The male is moving, the female is tranquil. 

Descending from the origin. 

Flowing toward the end. 

The myriad beings are being born. 

Purity—the source of turbidity. 

Movement—the root of tranquility. 

Always be pure and tranquil; 

Heaven and earth 
Return to the primordial. 

The human spirit is fond of purity. 

But the mind disturbs it. 

The human mind is fond of tranquility. 

But desires meddle with it. 



Fig. 2. The Empty Tao Develops into the 
World: The Diagram of the Great Ultimate. 
Source: Taiji tushuo. 




3. Pure and Tranquil 


27 


Get rid of desires for good, 

And the mind will be calm. 

Cleanse your mind, 

And the spirit will be pure. 

Naturally the six desires won’t arise. 

The three poisons are destroyed. 

Whoever cannot do this 
Has not yet cleansed his mind. 

His desires are not yet driven out. 

Those who have abandoned their desires: 
Observe your mind by introspection— 

And see there is no mind. 

Then observe the body. 

Look at yourself from without— 

And see there is no body. 

Then observe others by glancing out afar— 
And see there are no beings. 

Once you have realized these three. 

You observe emptiness! 

Use emptiness to observe emptiness. 

And see there is no emptiness. 

When even emptiness is no more. 

There is no more nonbeing either. 

Without even the existence of nonbeing 
There is only serenity. 

Profound and everlasting. 

When serenity dissolves in nothingness— 
How could there be desires? 

When no desires arise 

You have found true tranquility. 

In true tranquility, go along with beings; 

In true permanence, realize inner nature. 
Forever going along, forever tranquil— 

This is permanent purity, lasting tranquility. 



28 


The Tao 


In purity and tranquility, 

Gradually enter the true Tao. 

When the true Tao is entered, 

It is realized. 

Though we speak of “realized,” 

Actually there is nothing to attain. 

Rather, we speak of realization 

When someone begins to transform the myriad beings. 

Only who has properly understood this 
Is worthy to transmit the sages’ Tao. 

The highest gentleman does not fight; 

The lesser gentleman loves to fight. 

Highest Virtue is free from Virtue; 

Lesser Virtue clings to Virtue. 

All clinging and attachments 

Have nothing to do with the Tao or the Virtue. 

People fail to realize the Tao 
Because they have deviant minds. 

Deviance in the mind 
Means the spirit is alarmed. 

Spirit alarmed. 

There is clinging to things. 

Clinging to things. 

There is searching and coveting. 

Searching and coveting. 

There are passions and afflictions. 

Passions, afflictions, deviance, and imaginings 
Trouble and pester body and mind. 

Then one falls into turbidity and shame. 

Ups and downs, life and death. 

Forever immersed in the sea of misery. 

One is in eternity lost to the true Tao. 



4. Ineffable Knowledge 


29 


The Tao of true permanence 
Will naturally come to those who understand. 
Those who understand the realization of the Tao 
Will rest forever in the pure and tranquil. 


4. Ineffable Knowledge 

The Zhuangzi is the second most worthy ancient classic of 
Taoism after the Daode jing. In its present edition it consists of 
thirty-three chapters. Only the first seven are accepted as being 
close to the philosopher Zhuangzi himself, a man who lived in the 
fourth century b.c.e. in the south of China. The remaining chapters 
are associated with different schools of ancient philosophical Tao¬ 
ism, including the Primitivists, the Hedonists, the Syncretists, and 
later followers of Zhuangzi’s thought. Chapter 22, from which the 
stories are taken, belongs to the latter. 

The Zhuangzi is famous for its high literary quality, its humor, 
and the depths of its insights. Throughout the history of Taoism, 
the text has never failed to inspire practitioners and poets alike. 

For translations, see Watson 1968, Graham 1981 and 1982. 
Discussions are found in Mair 1983, Allinson 1990. On the history 
and origin of the text, see Graham 1980, Roth 1991a. 

The are also two other texts of philosophical Taoism, the 
Huainanzi and the Liezi. Like the Zhuangzi, they present philo¬ 
sophical concepts in literary and metaphorical format. On the 
Huainanzi, see LeBlanc 1978, 1985, Roth 1992; for a translation of 
the Liezi, see Graham 1960. 


“Zhi beiyou” (Knowledge Wandered North), Zhuangzi, chap. 22. 

Knowledge wandered north to the far side of the primordial 
waters and climbed the hills of the absconded rise. There he hap¬ 
pened to meet Non-Action-No-Words. 

Knowledge said to Non-Action-No-Words: “I would like to put 
some questions to you. By what thinking, by what reflection can I 
know the Tao? By what setting, by what activities can I be at peace 
with the Tao? By what procedures, by what way can I attain the 
Tao?” 

He put these three questions, but Non-Action-No-Words did 
not answer. It was not that he did not answer. He did not know 
how to answer. 



30 


The Tao 


Knowledge thus did not get any answer. He returned to the 
south of the white waters and climbed the heights of suspicions-at- 
rest. There he caught sight of Crazy Grouchy. Knowledge, in the 
same words, put the three questions to Crazy Grouchy. 

“Ah! I know!” said Crazy Grouchy. “I’ll tell you.” 

But just as he wished to say something, he forgot what he 
wished to say. 

Knowledge thus did not get any answer. He returned to the 
imperial palace, where he had an audience with the Yellow Em¬ 
peror. He posed his questions. 

“Only with no thinking nor reflection,” said the Yellow Em¬ 
peror, “can you begin to know the Tao. Only with no setting nor 
activities can you begin to be at peace with the Tao. Only with no 
procedures nor way can you begin to attain the Tao.” 

Knowledge had a further question. ‘You and I know,” he said, 
“but those other two did not. Which of us is right?” 

“Non-Action-No-Words is truly right,” the Yellow Emperor ex¬ 
plained. “Crazy Grouchy appears to be so. But you and I, after all, 
don’t even come close. Really! Who knows does not speak—who speaks 
does not know. 'Therefore the sage practices the teaching without 
words. 'The Tao cannot be brought about; Virtue cannot be approached. 

“But benevolence,” he went on, “can be actively practiced. Righ¬ 
teousness can be lost or gained, and the rites can be considered 
true or false. Thus we say: Lose the Tao and then there is Virtue; 
lose Virtue and then there is benevolence; lose benevolence and 
then there is righteousness; lose righteousness and then there are 
the rites. Rites are the marginal ornaments of the Tao. They are 
the beginning of disorder. 

‘“Thus we say,” the Yellow Emperor continued, “practice the 
Tao and decrease day by day. Decrease and again decrease, until 
you come to non-action. In non-action there is nothing that is not 
done. Now we already are active beings. To want to go back and 
recover our root, is this not indeed difficult? Only the great man 
might find it easy. 

“Life is the follower of death; death is the beginning of life. 
Who knows their patterns? Human life is an assembly of energy. It 
assembles and there is life; it disperses and there is death. Death 
and life follow each other naturally. So why should I feel distressed? 

“From that perspective the myriad beings are in fact one. We 
find some beautiful because they are spiritual and strange; others 
we think of as hateful because they are smelly and rotten. But the 
smelly and rotten will again change and be spiritual and strange; 



4. Ineffable Knowledge 


31 


and the spiritual and strange will again turn to be smelly and 
rotten. So we say: Just penetrate the one energy of all-under-heaven. 
The sage, accordingly, places highest value on absolute oneness.” 

Knowledge pondered this. “I asked Non-Action-No-Words and 
he did not give me a reply,” he said to the Yellow Emperor. “It was 
not that he did not give me a reply. He did not know how to reply. I 
asked Crazy Grouchy and he wished to tell me, but he did not tell 
me. It was not that he did not tell me. But just as he wished to say 
something, he forgot what he wished to say. Now I have asked you. 
You know. Why then do you say you don’t even come close?” 

“Non-Action-No-Words is truly right. Because he does not know. 
Crazy Grouchy appears to be so. Because he forgets. But you and I, 
after all, don’t even come close. Because we know.” 

Crazy Grouchy heard about this. He thought the Yellow Em¬ 
peror knew what he was talking about. 

* 

Master Eastwall asked Zhuangzi, “What we call the Tao—where 
does it exist?” 

“There’s no place it does not exist,” Zhuangzi replied. 

“Come on,” said Master Eastwall, “you must be more specific!” 

“It is in the ant.” 

“How can it be so low?” 

“It is in the panic grass.” 

“How can it be even lower?” 

“It is in the tiles and shards.” 

“How can it be lower still?” 

“It is even in excrement!” 

Master Eastwall did not reply. 

“Sir,” Zhuangzi said in explanation, “your questions do not reach 
the substance. When Inspector Huo asked the superintendent of 
the market how to test the fatness of a pig by pressing it with the 
foot, he was told that the lower down one pressed, the better.” 

“But,” he went on, “you must not apply this rule to the Tao. 
Nothing ever avoids its presence. Such is the perfect Tao. So too 
are truly great words. Encompassing, universal, including all. These 
three are different words but mean the same. They all indicate just 
one reality.” 

He took a breath, then went on. 

“Why don’t you wander with me,” he asked companionably, “to 
the Palace of Not-Even-Anything? We’ll be together and in 



32 


The Tao 


harmony for our discussions, never ending, never exhausted. Why 
don’t you join me in non-action? Be serene and tranquil, carefree 
and utterly pure, finely tuned and at leisure? Already my will is 
open vastness. I go nowhere and do not know where Fm getting to. 
I go and come and do not know where to stop. Fve already come 
and gone many times, but I do not know when it’ll be over. I ramble 
and relax in endless openness. Great knowledge enters in and I do 
not know where it will ever end.” 

He paused to collect his thoughts. 

“That which treats beings as beings does not have the limits of 
beings,” he continued with conviction. “Beings have their limits—the 
so-called limit of beings. The limit of the unlimited ultimately is the 
limitless end of the limit. We speak of beings filling and emptying, 
decaying and dying. The Tao makes them full and empty, but is not 
itself full or empty. It makes them decay and die, but does not itself 
decay or die. It establishes their roots and branches, but is itself free 
from roots or branches. It determines when they assemble and dis¬ 
perse, but in itself neither assembles nor disperses.” 



Chapter Two 


CREATION 


The Tao is responsible for all-that-is; it is at the ground beyond 
all existence and yet immanent in all its forms. The Tao creates; in 
its most immediate appearance it is the creation of the universe. 
First all emptiness and nonbeing, it is formless and vague. Revolv¬ 
ing around for long periods of time and through various stages of 
primordiality and chaos, it eventually divides into two, originally 
equally formless energies, one light, one heavy, one bright, one 
dark. These are yin and yang, the original pair of complementary 
opposites. Through them, there are heaven and earth, the sun and 
the moon, light and darkness, hot and cold, and all the various 
distinctions that make up the world of existence. 

Combining again, yin and yang then give rise to the myriad 
beings, plants and living creatures, of which humans are one. Giv¬ 
ing different distributions to different beings, the multiplicity of 
life evolves, patterned according to the scheme of the five agents or 
phases, which represent yin and yang in the varying stages of 
lesser and greater. 

The first things created, the forces at the very brink of exist¬ 
ence, are pure emanations of yin and yang. They are the gods and 
the heavens, the scriptures and the talismans. These are the Tao in 
its most original and yet no longer empty and formless shape; they 
are the world on the threshold of being born. Only due to their 
existence can everything else come into being; only through the 
creative and salvational will of the gods in their heavens, through 
the powerful sacred formulas embedded in the scriptures and the 
talismans, can the world ever take shape. Not only creating, these 
forces continue to be part of the wider universe. Forever the same 
and yet ever new, they descend into the world of humanity to 
rectify and save, to support and cherish, to reveal the purity of the 
Tao. They are a canopy of Tao that is always there, that can be 


33 



34 


Creation 


called upon in ritual and reached in meditation. They are the source 
of creation as much as the cause of the world’s continued existence 
and the ultimate hope of the salvation of all. 

The selections below give accounts of the original state of the 
world from different perspectives and traditions. 

First, the Kaitian jing (Scripture of Opening the Cosmos), is a 
short account of the origins of the world, beginning with formless 
nothingness and ending with the Zhou dynasty. Inspired by High¬ 
est Clarity Taoism, it dates approximately from the Tang dynasty 
(618-906). It centers around the figure of the Venerable Lord, the 
deified Laozi and embodiment of the Tao. It integrates the early 
myth of the transformations of Laozi (see below)—the notion that 
he appeared in every age to be the teacher of the dynasty—with 
the historical vision of classical Chinese mythology. 

Next, the Lingbao lueji (A Short Record of Numinous Trea¬ 
sure), concentrates on the role of the talismans of Numinous Trea¬ 
sure in the creation and continued salvation of the world. It is 
inspired by the Numinous Treasure (Lingbao) school and dates 
back to the third century. The central deity here is the Heavenly 
Venerable of Primordial Beginning (Yunshi tianzun), an adaptation 
of the Buddha, as much in the Lingbao school is influenced by 
Buddhism. The purpose of the document is to establish an inte¬ 
grated connection between the kalpic revolutions at the dawn of 
time with the emergence of the historical Lingbao tradition in the 
fourth century. It reinterprets history to this end. 

Third, the Shizhou ji (Record of the Ten Continents), is an 
account of the isles and paradises of the immortals. These realms 
of high purity are part of the original state of the Tao; they house 
wondrous plants and animals which can bestow salvation upon 
human beings. The text is related to tales of the marvelous that 
were popular in the early middle ages (220-589) and was also 
integrated into the Highest Clarity corpus. It is a description of 
sacred geography as much as of the concrete conditions of the heav¬ 
ens, in which the pure representatives of the Tao reside. 

Fourth, finally, there is biography of the Queen Mother of 
the West (Xiwang mu). Written by Du Guangting (850-933) in 
the late Tang and contained in his Yongcheng jixian lu (Record 
of the Assembled Immortals of the Heavenly Walled City), this 
provides some insight into the nature and daily tasks of the 
Taoist gods. They, as much as their lands and the celestial scrip¬ 
tures and talismans, are part of the original creation—existing 



5. Scriptures Create the Universe 


35 


and yet uncreated, formless and yet powers of salvation to be 
called upon. 


5. Scriptures Create the Universe 

The Taishang laojun kaitian jing (The Scripture of How the 
Highest Venerable Lord Opens the Cosmos) is contained twice in 
the Taoist canon, in DZ 1437, fasc. 1059, and in chapter 2 of the 
Yunji qiqian (Seven Tablets in a Cloudy Satchel), a Taoist encyclo¬ 
pedia from the early eleventh century (DZ 1032, fasc. 677-702). 

Probably dating from the Tang dynasty (618-906), it shows a 
certain Mahayana Buddhist influence. Not only in its initial for¬ 
mula, “Thus I have heard,” but also in its contents, for example in 
the description of the size and heavenly nature of the scriptures, in its 
phrasing, “as numerous as the sands of the Ganges,” and in the final 
verse or gatha of Laozi, it follows the pattern of a Buddhist sutra. 

Nevertheless, the text is primarily an indigenous version of the 
creation. It integrates philosophical views of the stages of the uni¬ 
verse, first expressed in the tradition of the Yijing (Book of Changes), 
with the myth of the transformations of Laozi, who appears in 
every age to be the teacher of the dynasty, and the traditional 
Chinese understanding of ancient history and the beginnings of 
culture. 

There is no study of Taoist creation myths to date. For a com¬ 
parative analysis of the myth of chaos (Hundun) in philosophical 
Taoism, see Girardot 1983. On the mythology and cosmology of 
Highest Clarity, see Robinet 1984. On Laozi as the body of the Tao, 
see Schipper 1978, 1982. 


Taishang laojun kaitian jing (Scripture of How the Highest 
Venerable Lord Opens the Cosmos) 

[la] Thus I have heard. Before heaven and earth opened, all 
was endless beyond Great Clarity; all was limitless in Barren 
Nonbeing. Desolate and vast it was, and without bounds. 

No heaven nor earth ; no yin nor yang, 
no sun nor moon ; no brightness nor radiance, 
no east nor west; no green nor yellow, 
no south nor north ; no soft nor hard. 



36 


Creation 


no cover nor support: no embrace nor closeness, 
no wisdom nor sageliness : no loyalty nor goodness, 
no going nor coming : no arising nor passing, 
no front nor back : no round nor square. 

It transformed hundreds of millions of times, all grand and 
vast, vast and grand! No shape nor sign. Pure so-being and empti¬ 
ness! Oh , how unfathomable! 

No measure nor end : no high nor low 
no even nor odd : no left nor right. 

Above and below, in pure so-being alone. 

The Venerable Lord, the Tao, was at rest in open mystery, beyond 
silent desolation, in mysterious emptiness. Look and do not see, 
[lb] listen and do not hear. Say it/he is there and do not see a 
shape; say it/he is not there, yet all beings follow him for life. 
Beyond the eight bounds—slowly, slowly—first it divides. Sinks to 
form the subtle and the wondrous, to make the world. 

Then there was Vast Prime [HunyuanJ. In the time of Vast 
Prime, there still was no heaven and no earth, the empty void had 
not yet separated, clear and turbid were not yet divided. In myste¬ 
rious barrenness and silent desolation. Vast Prime continued for a 
myriad kalpas. 

Then Vast Prime divided, and there was Coagulated Prime 
[Hongyuan]. Coagulated Prime continued for a myriad kalpas until 
it reached its perfection. Its perfection lasted for eighty-one times 
ten thousand years. 

Then there was Grand Antecedence [Taichu]. In the time of 
Grand Antecedence, 

The Venerable Lord descended from barren emptiness to be the 
teacher of Grand Antecedence. His mouth brought forth the Scrip¬ 
ture of Opening the Cosmos in one section and forty-eight times ten 
thousand scrolls. Each scroll had forty-eight times ten thousand 
characters. Each character was one hundred square miles in size. 
Thus he taught Grand Antecedence. 

In Grand Antecedence, for the first time he separated heaven 
and earth, the clear and the turbid. [2a] He divided boundless 
galaxies and vast nebulae. He set up shapes and signs. He secured 
north and south. He ordered east and west. He opened the dark¬ 
ness and made light. He positioned the four universal mainstays. 



5. Scriptures Create the Universe 


37 


Above and below, inside and out, within and without, long and 
short, gross and subtle, female and male, white and black, big and 
small, noble and humble—all were constantly moving along in 
darkness. 

But when Coagulated Prime attained the Scripture of Opening 
the Cosmos of 

The Venerable Lord, clear and turbid were separated. Clear energy 
rose up and formed heaven. Turbid energy sank down and formed 
earth. The three spheres were established. Then, for the first time, 
there were heaven and earth. Yet, still no sun nor moon. 

Heaven desired to transform beings, to afford them changes 
without bounds. Therefore it set up the sun and the moon in its 
midst. They would illuminate the darkness below. In the time of 
Grand Antecendence, there were thus the sun and the moon. Still 
no human beings. Slowly, they first came forth. Above he took the 
essence of heaven. Below he took the essence of earth. He joined 
them in the middle and made a spirit called human. 

Heaven and earth were first void; then there were the three 
initial divisions. [2b] All species of life were without sign or shape. 
Each received just one bit of energy and life was complete. Those 
with raw energy for life were stones and mountains. Those with 
moving energy for life were birds and beasts. Those with essential 
energy for life were human beings. Among all the myriad beings, 
humans are the highest. 

Grand Antecedence continued for a myriad kalpas. Then only 
human beings appeared. Thus this period is called Grand Antecedence. 
At this time, there were only heaven and earth, the sun and the 
moon, animals and people. Still no consciousness nor language. 

When Grand Antecedence came to an end. Grand Initiation 
[Taishi] emerged. In the time of Grand Initiation, 

The Venerable Lord descended to be its teacher. His mouth brought 
forth the Scripture of Grand Initiation in one section. Thus he 
taught Grand Initiation. He worked to set up all under heaven for 
ninety-one times ten thousand years. After ninety-one times ten 
thousand years, it reached its perfection. The perfection lasted 
eighty-one times ten thousand years. 

Grand Initiation is the beginning of the myriad beings. Thus it 
is called Grand Initiation. It flowed and revolved, perfected and 
refined all immaculate signs in its midst. [3a] Energy became solid 
and transformed into perfect yin and yang. 

When Grand Initiation came to an end, there was Grand Im¬ 
maculate [Taisu]. In the time of Grand Immaculate, 




Fig. 3. The Venerable Lord. Source; Laojun bashiyi hua tushuo. 









5. Scriptures Create the Universe 


39 


The Venerable Lord descended to be its teacher. He taught Grand 
Immaculate how to order all under heaven. After eighty-one kalpas, 
it reached its perfection. This lasted eighty-one times ten thousand 
years. Grand Immaculate is the immaculate state of the myriad 
beings. Thus it is called Grand Immaculate. 

From Grand Antecedence to Grand Immaculate, heaven brought 
forth sweet dew and earth brought forth sweet wine. People lived 
on these and attained long life. Upon death they would not bury 
the corpse, but abandon it in a distant wilderness. This period is 
called High Antiquity. 

Then Grand Immaculate came to an end and there was Chaos 
[Hundun]. In the time of Chaos, for the first time there were moun¬ 
tains and streams. 

The Venerable Lord descended to be its teacher. He taught Chaos 
how to govern all under heaven. For seventy-two kalpas, he flowed 
along with Chaos. He completed its mountains and rivers, and 
there first were the five sacred mountains and four majestic streams. 
High and low, noble and humble arose for the first time. 

From the time of Chaos, there were consciousness and lan¬ 
guage. With the name of Chaos there were two personages. [3b] 
The elder was Barbarian Vassal [Huchen]; the younger was Bar¬ 
barian Soul [Huling]. The elder died and became the god of the 
mountains. The younger died and became the god of the rivers. 
They gave names to the five sacred mountains, the four majestic 
streams, and to all the mountains and rivers, high and low. 

Then Chaos came to an end and there was Nine Palaces 
[Jiugong]. In the time of Nine Palaces, 

The Venerable Lord descended to be its teacher. His mouth brought 
forth the Scripture of the Heaven and Earth Hexagrams in one 
section. Teaching Nine Palaces, he first gave people consciousness 
and language of heaven and earth. Pure energy formed heaven; 
turbid energy formed earth. Ever since Nine Palaces, heaven was 
yang and earth was yin. Yang is hard and strong. It is hard to see 
from afar. In heaven it forms the signs—sun, moon, stars, and 
constellations. On earth it forms the shapes—the five sacred moun¬ 
tains and the four majestic rivers. In human beings it forms the 
five orbs including the heart and the liver. Divided, it receives 
many names. Joined, it is called the One. 

Nine Palaces came to an end and there was the Primordial 
Sovereign [Yuanhuang]. In the time of the Primordial Sovereign, 
The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. His mouth 
brought forth the Scripture of the Primordial Sovereign in one sec- 



40 


Creation 


tion. Thus he taught the Primordial Sovereign how to order all 
under heaven. [4a] For the first time, there was an imperial gov¬ 
ernment. It flowed along to later generations and gradually reached 
perfection. 

After the Primordial Sovereign, there was the Great Highest 
Sovereign [Taishang huang]. In the time of the Great Highest Sov¬ 
ereign, 

The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He taught the 
Great Highest Sovereign how to order all under heaven. 

After the Great Highest Sovereign, there was the Earth Sover¬ 
eign [Dihuang]. After the Earth Sovereign, there was the Human 
Sovereign [Renhuang]. After the Human Sovereign, there was the 
Venerable Lii [Zun Lii]. After the Venerable Lii, there was the 
Crooked Lou [Gou Lou]. After the Crooked Lou, there was the 
Glorious Xu [He Xu]. After the Glorious Xu, there was the Great 
Lian [Tai Lian]. 

From Chaos to the Great Lian, this is called Middle Antiquity. 
During this period, heaven brought forth the five energies. Earth 
brought forth the five flavors. The people lived on these and at¬ 
tained extended years. 

After the Great Lian ended, there was the ruler Hidden Vapor 
[Fu Xi]. He was born at the source of a spring in accordance with 
heaven. He harmonized yin and yang and established the eight 
trigrams. Before Hidden Vapor, the five classics had not been re¬ 
corded and there had not been a system of writing. There had only 
been [4b] 

The Venerable Lord who followed the barren emptiness of heaven, 
immeasurable as the sands of the Ganges. He rested beyond Great 
Clarity, unfathomable in its vastness. Since the division of the Great 
Tao and the existence of heaven and earth, he had established the 
imperial government and assisted the rulers in their task. With the 
world he flowed along to later generations and recorded their events. 

In the time of Hidden Vapor, 

The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He was called 
Master of Non-Efflorescence or Master of Luxuriant Efflorescence. 
He taught Hidden Vapor how to expand the old laws and extend 
yin and yang. He made him order the eight directions and set up 
the eight trigrams. He produced the Scripture of Primordial Yang 
in order to teach Hidden Vapor. 

Before him, there had been no clan names nor personal appel¬ 
lations. Now everywhere there were names. People then were simple 
and straightforward; they did not yet have the five grains. Hidden 



5. Scriptures Create the Universe 


41 


Vapor taught them how to make nets and traps to catch birds and 
beasts to eat. They all wore furs and lived on blood, smelling rancid 
and putrid. Men and women were not separated; there was no 
jealousy between them. In winter they lived in caves; in summer 
they made their homes on trees. 

After Hidden Vapor, there was the ruler Snake Woman [Niigua]. 
She was followed by the ruler Divine Farmer [Shennong]. In the 
time of Divine Farmer, [5a] 

The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He was called 
Master of Great Completion. He produced the Scripture of Great 
Tenuity. He taught Divine Farmer about the hundred plants and 
gave him the five grains. Divine Farmer ordered the people to 
plant and reap them so that they could eat them instead of taking 
the lives of birds and beasts. 

After Divine Farmer, there was the ruler Fire Drill [Suiren]. Again, 
The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He taught Fire 
Drill to drill wood and make fire. This would continue the light of 
day and allowed the cooking of raw meat. It put an end to the 
rancid and bloody smells. 

After Fire Drill, there was the ruler Blessed Mel ter [Zhurong]. 
The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He was called 
Master of Wide Longevity. He taught Blessed Melter to cultivate 
the three mainstays of heaven and to harmonize the course of the 
seven planets. Under the earlier rulers, who had cultivated the 
Tao, there had been no sickness among the people. Now he pro¬ 
duced the Scripture of Applying Pressure and Guiding Essence [to 
help against diseases]. 

Next there were the rulers High Source [Gaoyuan], High Yang 
[Gaoyang], and High Toil [Gaoxin]. After them came Dark Knot 
[Cangjie] whom he taught how to write. 

After these rulers, there was the Yellow Emperor [Huangdi]. In 
the time of the Yellow Emperor, [5b] 

The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He was called 
Master of Wide Perfection. He harmonized yin and yang and pro¬ 
duced the Scripture of Tao Precepts. In the time of the Yellow Em¬ 
peror, for the first time there were the formal ranks of ruler and 
minister, father and son. Venerable and common were divided; noble 
and bumble made a difference. 

After the Yellow Emperor, there was Lesser Brilliance [Shaohao]. 
In the time of Lesser Brilliance, 

The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He was called 
Master of Following in Accordance. He produced the Scripture of 



42 


Creation 


Mysterious Repository. The times were peaceful, crops grew in abun¬ 
dance, sweet springs gushed forth, unicorns arrived, phoenixes were 
spotted, and the stars shone bright. 

After Lesser Brilliance, there was Good Xu [Zhuan Xu], In the 
time of Good Xu, 

The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He was called 
Master of Red Essence. He produced the Scripture of Tenuous Words. 

After the Good Xu, there was Emperor Ku [Di Ku]. After Em¬ 
peror Ku, there was Emperor Yao [Di Yao]. In the time of Emperor 
Yao, 

The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He was called 
Master of Perfected Duty. He produced the Scripture of Govern¬ 
ment Service. 

After Emperor Yao, there was Emperor Shun [Di Shun]. In the 
time of Emperor Shun, [6a] 

The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He was called 
Master of Ruling Longevity. He produced the Scripture of Great 
Clarity . 

After Emperor Shun, there was Yu of Xia [Xia Yu]. In the time 
of Yu of Xia, 

The Venerable Lord descended to be his teacher. He was called 
Master of True Practice. He produced the Scripture of Virtuous 
Precepts. 

After Yu of Xia, there was Tang of Yin [Yin Tang]. After Tang of 
Yin, the Zhou dynasty arrived. In the time of the Zhou dynasty. 

The Venerable Lord descended to be its teacher. He was called 
Master of Adjusting the Regions. He produced the Scripture of Red 
Essence. 


The Venerable Lord said: 

At the beginning of the mysterious transformations, 
I embodied emptiness and non-being. 

Passing along through the limitless, 

I changed and transformed myriads of times. 

Then I first came down 

And was the teacher of the world. 

Before the Three Sovereigns 
I was the root of all the spirit transformations. 
Under the Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors 



6. Numinous Treasure—Wondrous History 


43 


I helped them as their teacher. 

Thus it went on, down to the Three Dynasties. 
I admonished them all 
To cultivate goodness. 


6. Numinous Treasure—Wondrous History 


The school of Numinous Treasure (Lingbao) developed in the 
wake of Highest Clarity (Shangqing) at the end of the fourth and 
beginning of the fifth centuries. Its first scripture was compiled by 
Ge Chaofu, who traced the origin of his revelation back through 
several generations of his family to Ge Hong, noted alchemist and 
author of the Baopuzi, and to Ge Xuan, a magic master and Taoist 
of the second century. Later followers integrated Buddhist doctrine 
and terminology, and the Lingbao scriptures thus created a differ¬ 
ent vision of the origins and workings of the cosmos. 

Creation here is the intertwined development of religion, his¬ 
tory, and the Ge-family tradition. It proceeds through the cycles of 
kalpas, long periods of universal rise and decline, and depends 
largely on the power of talismans or treasures. Talismans are 
heavenly symbols or charts that contain the original power of the 
Tao in graphic form. Not only are they responsible for the cre¬ 
ation and continued existence of the world, they also bestow on 
their bearer magical powers and the divine right to rule. Famous 
charts of old are the Hetu (River Chart) and the Wuyue zhenxing 
tu (Chart of the True Shape of the Five Sacred Mountains). Both 
convey absolute power over all under heaven, i.e., the empire of 
China. 

The Lingbao tradition traces itself back to the revelation of five 
central talismans, associated with the five directions. These five 
are described in the Lingbao ivufu xu (Explanations of the Five 
Talismans of Numinous Treasure) contained in DZ 388, fasc. 183. 
This text is a composite mixture of ancient myths, longevity meth¬ 
ods, and descriptions of the talismans. It goes back to the third 
century c.e. 

The Lingbao lueji, translated here for the first time, is a sum¬ 
mary of the sacred history of Numinous Treasure contained in the 
Yunji qiqian ( 3.9a-llb). It summarizes the myth originally found 
in the first scroll of the Lingbao wufuxu. For a translation of this 



44 


Creation 


latter version, see Bokenkamp 1986. On the Wufuxu and its devel¬ 
opment, see Kaltenmark 1981, Yamada 1989. On the historical 
origin of the Lingbao scriptures, see Ofuchi 1974, Bokenkamp 1983. 
For Lingbao worldview, see Kaltenmark 1960, Bokenkamp 1989, 
1990; Ziircher 1980. 


Lingbao lueji (A Short Record of the Numinous Treasure) 

[9a] It is recorded: When the sacred scriptures of the True Law 
of Numinous Treasure first arose, our world of measure was just 
empty void. Infathomable it was! Oh, immeasurable! 

Kalpa after kalpa they emerged and transformed. Unimagin¬ 
able it was! Oh, unthinkable! 

In the past, there was then a first kalpa, called Dragon Coun¬ 
try. A sage was born. Him we know as the Heavenly Venerable of 
Brahma Energy. He appeared in the world and with the teaching of 
Numinous Treasure transformed and saved countless people. His 
true law radiated through many thousands of worlds. 

One revolution of Dragon Country lasted ninety thousand times 
nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine eons. Yet eventually 
even the energy revolutions of this kalpa came to their end. Heaven 
collapsed and the earth tumbled down. The four seas merged into one 
and the trigrams of heaven and earth were destroyed. There was no 
more light. The era of darkness lasted for one hundred million eons. 

Then heaven and earth began anew. Another kalpa emerged; it 
was called Red Radiance. A sage appeared in the world. Him we 
know as the Heavenly Venerable of Primordial Beginning. He too 
used the teaching of Numinous Treasure to transform and save 
people. His True Law flourished greatly and all was as we have 
described above. Red Radiance lasted for two eons. Then heaven 
and earth collapsed again. There was no more light. Darkness 
reigned for five eons. 

[9b] Then heaven and earth began anew. In the first year of 
the era Opening Sovereign, the Highest Lord of the Tao took birth 
in the west. He entrusted himself to the womb of Mrs. Hong in the 
country of Green Jade. For 3,700 years he coagulated his spirit in 
the repository of her womb. Then he was born in the Green Jade 
country, on the Peak of Floating Network in the Mountains of Flour¬ 
ishing Growth, on the bank of the Cinnabar Mystery River. 

He became known as the Helper to Deliverance, the Highest 
Who Created the Prime. When he had grown up he first awakened 
to the truth of the Tao. He thereupon readied his heart for its 
loftiness. 



6. Numinous Treasure—Wondrous History 


45 


Once he was sitting under a withered mulberry tree, deep, 
deep in meditation for a hundred days. The Heavenly Venerable of 
Primordial Beginning descended into his presence. He transmitted 
to the Lord of the Tao the true law of the Great Vehicle of Numinous 
Treasure. The Lord thus received the wondrous sacred scriptures 
in ten sections. 

Thus the Heavenly Venerable came to reside in this country at 
this time. He spread joy to all its dwellings. He gave his teaching 
freely to the people of the time. Many were those who through him 
received the True Law that opens the gates of heaven. The people 
who attained the Tao in those days were more numerous even than 
the sands of the Ganges. 

Later the Heavenly Venerable and the Lord of the Tao wan¬ 
dered together in all the ten directions of the world, spreading the 
True Law everywhere. After they had completed this task, the Heav¬ 
enly Venerable entrusted all matters of the Law to the Lord of the 
Tao. He formally bestowed the title “Highest” on him. 

[10a] The Highest Lord of the Tao continued to widely spread 
scriptures and records so that they would be properly transmitted 
for ten thousand generations. At that time, the Great Law had 
spread far and wide throughout the ten directions. Only to the city 
and country of Ferghana [in Central Asia] the sound of the law had 
not yet reached. Yet many people there were destined to have close 
relations with the law. 

In antiquity there once reigned an emperor by the name of Ku. 
To him the Highest Lord sent the True Sovereign of the Three 
Heavens with the True Writ of the Five Chapters of the Numinous 
Treasure. He bestowed this sacred text on Emperor Ku. The em¬ 
peror received them with deep respect and kept them well. He 
spent his remaining years safeguarding these records of the Law 
and preparing their proper transmission to the world. When he 
was about to become an immortal, he sealed the scripture in Cop¬ 
per Mountain. Copper Mountain is in the northwest, beyond a 
weakwater stream. It is 15,000 miles high. 

When Emperor Yu of the Xia dynasty ascended the throne, he 
climbed all the sacred mountains. On one circuit, he crossed the 
weakwater stream and went up Copper Mountain. He thus ob¬ 
tained the True Writ of the Numinous Treasure that Emperor Ku 
had sealed in there. 

He deeply bowed to the scripture and brought it out of hiding. 
From then on, in his cultivation and practice he relied on the True 
Law. But Emperor Yu cultivated only himself with its help. He did 
not make it accessible to the world at large. Thus he himself 



46 


Creation 


obtained the powers of a great spirit immortal. He could chisel 
open the Dragon Gate of the Yellow River and structure the course 
of the four streams. When his labors were concluded, all rivers 
flowed in orderly channels and the empire was firmly secure. 

[10b] Later, Emperor Yu allowed his body to undergo a trans¬ 
formation that looked like death. In reality, he never actually died. 
Even today the wise emulate his traces; the perfected recognize his 
numinous power. 

Before Yu underwent the transformation, he again sealed 
the sacred scripture away. This time he hid two copies: one in 
the sacred mountain of the north; the other in a grotto on Packet 
Mountain. 

Time passed. Years later King Held of Wu wandered around 
and reached Packet Mountain. There he encountered a man. 

“Who are you?” the king asked. 

“My name is Mountain; I am called the Hermit.” 

“In this mountain,” the king questioned him further, “you must 
certainly have found strange things. Will you offer them to me?” 

Hermit assented. He entered deep into the mountain grotto, 
wandering into a separate earth world 1,500 miles large. After a 
long walk he came to a stone castle. He did not at once dare to 
enter, but fasted and purified himself for three days at its gates. 
Only then and with great care did he approach the stone castle. 
The gate opened to a huge chamber. On a jade table lay one plain 
scroll, covered with the most extraordinary script. Hermit bowed 
deeply before it and took it with profound respect. Emerging from 
the grotto, he presented it to the king. 

Held called his followers. Together they inspected the sacred 
scroll. The writing was in an ancient seal script which none of them 
could read. [11a] Therefore the king ordered one of his attendants to 
take it to Confucius and ask him about the meaning of the text. 

Meeting with the sage, the emissary was careless and told a lie 
about the origin of the manuscript. “My lord, the king of Wu,” he 
said, “was in his hall enjoying an hour of leisure. Suddenly a red 
bird appeared carrying this text in his beak. It dropped the scroll 
right before the king. But my lord does not understand its mean¬ 
ing. May I respectfully inquire about it?” 

Confucius looked sorrowful and did not answer for a while. 
Finally he said: “I recently heard a popular ditty. It goes: 

The king of Wu went wandering, looked at trembling lakes. 

Met the majestic dragon man, known as Mountain Hermit. 



6. Numinous Treasure—Wondrous History 


47 


North he climbed the Packet Mountain, entering numinous 
remains, 

In the end went to the grotto and stole the book of Yu. 

The Great Lord of Highest Heaven will not let that go. 

These documents are old indeed, passed for a hundred kalpas. 

Whoever grabs them by sheer force will lose his state and 
hearth. 

“If these are in fact the documents referred to in the ditty I can 
say something about them. If they were brought in the beak of a 
red bird, I have never heard of them.” 

The emissary deeply bent his head and apologized. “The facts 
are indeed as you state them.” 

“All right, then,” Confucius explained. “This scroll contains the 
True Writ of the Five Talismans of the Numinous Treasure. For¬ 
merly Emperor Yu of the Xia dynasty obtained them on Copper 
Mountain. Later he sealed them in a grotto chamber.” 

The emissary returned and related the explanation to King 
Held. [11b] The king thereupon sincerely venerated the sacred text. 
However, since his nature was wasteful and easy-going, he could 
not properly fulfill all the rules of the Tao. Before long the text flew 
up to heaven and vanished. Nobody knows where it went. 

Later the king’s son Fucha inherited the throne. He went to 
Labor Mountain and again obtained the scripture. He treated it 
with the proper respect and succeeded to keep it in the possession 
of his family for many generations. 

The time of the Three Kingdoms arrived. During the reign 
period Red Bird [238-251], when the land of Wu was ruled by Sun 
Quan, a man called Ge Xuan, also known as Xiaoxian, was born in 
Langya in the east of China as the son of Secretary Ge Xiaoru. His 
father was already eighty years old at the time of his birth. 

Ge Xuan was full of numinous power. Even at the early age of 
thirteen he was very fond of worshiping the Tao and the Virtue. He 
was pure and of loyal faith, staunchly upholding filial piety and 
modesty. However, he did not proceed to serve in office, but aban¬ 
doned all glory, gave up all income, and set his will firmly on the 
mountains and rivers. He duly went to the Tiantai mountains to 
study the Tao. He concentrated his mind in meditation, penetrat¬ 
ing ever deeper. In less than one year he attained full realization. 

The Highest Lord thereupon sent three sagely perfected down 
to transmit the sacred writings of Numinous Treasure to him. The 



48 


Creation 


first of these perfected was called Yu Laoqiao, the First Perfected of 
Highest Mysterious Unity. [12a] The second was called Guang 
Miaoyin, the Second Perfected of Highest Mysterious Unity. The 
third was called Zhen Dingguang, the Third Perfected of Highest 
Mysterious Unity. 

Before the three perfected descended, the Highest Lord had 
also ordered Xu Laile, the Perfected of the Great Ultimate, to be¬ 
come Ge Xuan’s teacher in the methods of the Three Caverns [teach¬ 
ings of Taoism]. From him Xuan received the sacred writings in 
twenty-three scrolls, together with instructions and questions in 
ten scrolls. Altogether he was honored with thirty-three scrolls. 

Later Ge Xuan transmitted these to Zheng Siyuan, who in 
turn passed them on to his nephew Shao. From him they went to 
Hai Anjun, also known as Xiaoyuan. This person handed the texts 
to his son Hujun, who gave them to the son of his younger brother. 
He in turn was none other than Ge Hong or Baopuzi, the famous 
Master Who Embraces Simplicity. 

Baopuzi was a disciple of Lord Zheng, who instructed him on 
Mount Luofou. About to leave the world, Baopuzi handed the texts 
to his nephew, known by the name Hai’anzi. Over several genera¬ 
tions they eventually reached his descendant Ge Chaofu [the com¬ 
piler of the Lingbao scriptures]. In the last year of the reign period 
Eminent Peace [401], Ge Chaofu transmitted the sacred scriptures 
to a number of Taoists, including Ren Yanqing and Xu Lingqi. For 
generation after generation the records had thus been handed on. 

However, later various schools and different traditions devel¬ 
oped. The scriptures were scattered and dispersed and the body of 
the inheritance was no longer one. [12b] This is what happens 
during a great kalpa revolution. 

Still, those who act in accordance with the original root will 
find themselves destined to encounter the sacred words in secrecy. 
With an intention for spirit enlightenment in their hearts, such 
noble people can still receive the sacred scriptures of the True Law 
of Numinous Treasure. 


7. The Lands of the Immortals 

The realm of the pure Tao, in which the gods and immortals 
are at home, consists of ten continents and two paradises. The ten 
continents are rather late (post-Han) and may, at least in their 
number, well go back to Buddhist cosmology, which counts ten 



7. The Lands of the Immortals 


49 


directions in the world. Traditional Chinese cosmology, on the con¬ 
trary, has nine as the perfect number. 

The two paradises have been part of Chinese mythology since 
before the Han dynasty (third century b.c.e.). They are the group of 
five islands around Penglai in the Eastern Sea and the mountain 
range of Kunlun in the Western Highlands. Some evidence suggests 
that the earliest visions of these paradises were related to the marvel¬ 
ous gardens built by the First Emperor of the Qin dynasty (221-210 
B.C.E.) and his Han-dynasty successors. On the other hand, the para¬ 
dise visions of the Taoists most certainly colored the Chinese percep¬ 
tion of the Buddhist Pure Land, introduced a few centuries later. 

The Shizhou ji is a record describing the lands of the immor¬ 
tals. It is placed in the mouth of Dongfang Shuo, an immortal and 
jester in the time of the Han emperor Wu (140-87 b.c.e.) and closely 
connected with the legends surrounding both personages. The text 
goes back to these stories, which are first documented in the second 
century c.e. In its present form, it probably dates from the fourth 
or fifth century, as does the Han Wudi neizhuan (The Secret Story 
of the Han Emperor Wu). Both texts are connected to the Taoism of 
Highest Clarity. 

The Shizhou ji is contained in DZ 598, fasc. 330, with a variant 
version in Yunji qiqian 26. For an excellent complete translation 
with detailed annotation, see Smith 1990. For a study of the legends 
surrounding the Han emperor Wu, see Schipper 1965, Smith 1992. 
On traditional Chinese cosmology, see Maspero 1924, Major 1984, 
Allan 1991. 


Shizhou ji (Record of the Ten Continents) 

[2a] Ancestor Continent is right about in the center of the 
Eastern Sea. It is five hundred square miles in area and lies sev¬ 
enty thousand miles from the western shore of the ocean. 

On this continent, there is a plant of no-death that resembles 
marsh-reed sprouts and grows to a height of three or four feet. 
Someone may be already dead for three days but if covered with 
this plant, he will come back to life in an instant. Its ingestion 
confers exceeding longevity. 

In old times, the First Emperor of the Qin dynasty had a great 
garden, filled with the corpses of executed people. However, when a 
flock of crow-like birds brought this plant in their beaks and cov¬ 
ered the faces of the dead with it, they rose up immediately and 
came back to life spontaneously. 



50 


Creation 


An official heard about this and reported it. The First Emperor 
duly dispatched envoys to take the plant to the Master of the De¬ 
mon Valley in the northern suburb to inquire about it. 

“This is the plant of no-death,” the Master said. “It comes from 
Ancestor Continent in the Eastern Sea. Grown in fields of jasper, it 
is also called the mushroom of spiritual cultivation. Its leaves are 
like marsh-reed sprouts; it grows in clusters, and one stalk can 
easily revive a human being.” 

“Can it be harvested?” The First Emperor asked eagerly and 
duly sent out the envoy Xu Fu with five hundred young men and 
young women. [2b] Led aboard high ships and other vessels, they 
went to sea in search of the Ancestral Continent. They did not 
return. Fu, in fact, was a master of the Tao. He was also called 
Junfang, and later became a perfected. 


Ocean Continent is also in the Eastern Sea. It is four thousand 
square miles in area and located approximately on the same level 
as Guiji (Zhejiang). It is about seven hundred thousand miles from 
the western shore of the ocean. 

This continent grows divine mushrooms and immortal plants. 
There is also a jade rock about a thousand fathoms high, from 
which a sweet spring gushes forth. It is named Sweet Jade Spring. 
Several pints of it make one gradually drunk. It confers longevity. 

Many immortals make their homes on this continent. Their 
customs are like those of the people of Wu. Mountains and rivers 
are also like those of the Middle Kingdom. 


Mystery Continent is in the northwest of the Northern Sea. It 
is seven thousand two hundred square miles in area and lies three 
hundred sixty thousand miles from the southern shore of the ocean. 

Its capital. Mystery Metropolis, is governed by immortal wor¬ 
thies and perfected dukes. There are many hills and mountains. 
There is also Wind Mountain, which makes sounds like thunder 
and lightning. [3a] 

Mystery Continent faces the northwestern gate of heaven. On 
this continent there are many immortal officials of Great Mystery. 
The palaces and chambers of these immortal officials are each unique 
in their own special way. They abound in golden mushrooms and 
jade plants. This area falls under the lower jurisdiction of the Lords 
of the Three Heavens. It is very majestic indeed. 



Fig. 4. The Ten Continents. Source: Xiuzhen taiji hunyuan tu. 


Blaze Continent is in the Southern Sea. It is two thousand 
square miles in area and lies ninety thousand miles from the north¬ 
ern shore of the ocean. 








52 


Creation 


On this continent are wind-born beasts which look like pan¬ 
thers. They have a fresh complexion and are about as big as a fox. 
Spread a net, capture one, and pile several cartloads of firewood to 
cook it. Though the firewood will be consumed, the beast will not 
catch fire. It just stands amidst the ashes with its fur unsinged. 
Axes and knives will not penetrate its fiesh, and if struck it is just 
like a leather bag. 

But take an iron hammer and hit it over the head several tens 
of times. Then it will die. Yet, spread its mouth open to the wind, it 
will revive in a moment. Another method to kill it is by stuffing 
its nose with calamus wrapped on a stone. One can then remove 
its brain and eat it mixed with chrysanthemum blossoms. If one 
eats ten catties of this, one will obtain a life span of five hundred 
years. 

There is also the mountain of Fire Forest. Here lives a beast of 
fiery radiance. It is the size of a rat. Its fur, sometimes red, some¬ 
times white, is three or four inches long. The mountain is three 
hundred miles high. [3b] If one can see this mountain forest at 
night, it is because the animals shine on it with a radiance like 
that of fire. 

Pluck the fur of such a beast and weave it into cloth—this is 
what people call “fire-washed cloth.” The people of that continent 
wear it. If it becomes soiled and one uses ashes and water to clean 
it, it never becomes clean. Only when one burns it in fire for the 
length of time it takes to eat two bowls of rice, one can shake off 
the dirt. With the dirt naturally falling off, the cloth becomes pure 
and white as snow. 

Many immortals make their homes here. 

Long Continent, also named Green Hill, is in the southeast of 
the Southern Sea. It is five thousand square miles in area and two 
hundred and fifty thousand miles from the coast. 

This continent has an abundance of mountains and rivers as 
well as numerous big trees. Among them are those that are two 
thousand arm spans in circumference. There is nothing but forest 
on the entire continent, hence it is also named Green Hill. 

There also grow plants conferring immortality, efficacious me¬ 
dicinal herbs, sweet-juice plants, and flowers with jade blossoms. 
They are virtually everywhere. In addition, there is a Wind Moun¬ 
tain, which makes a continuous rumbling sound. 

In the Palace of the Purple Court on this continent, heavenly 
perfected and immortal maidens amuse themselves. [4a] 



7. The Lands of the Immortals 


53 


Prime Continent is in the Northern Sea. It is three thousand 
square miles in area and lies one hundred thousand miles from the 
southern shore of the ocean. 

On this continent grow five kinds of sacred mushrooms; there 
also flows a dark rivulet. The water of the dark rivulet is thick and 
tastes like honey. Drinking it bestows a life as long as that of 
heaven and earth. Eating the five kinds of sacred mushrooms also 
results in long life and no-death. 

Floating Continent is in the Western Sea. It is three thousand 
square miles in area and lies one hundred and ninety thousand 
miles from the eastern shore of the ocean. 

On this continent are many mountains, streams, and assem¬ 
blies of a rock called kunwu. This may be smelted to make swords. 
Swords made from kunwu radiate as brightly and are as transpar¬ 
ent as rock crystal. They cut through jade as if it were mud. 

Many immortals make their homes here. 

Life Continent is in the northeast of the Eastern Sea. It over¬ 
laps Penglai by one hundred and seventy thousand miles. It is two 
thousand and five hundred square miles in area and lies two hun¬ 
dred and thirty thousand miles from the western shore of the ocean. 
[4b] 

On this continent are several tens of thousands of immortal 
households. Its natural atmosphere is stable and pleasant, so that 
mushrooms and plants grow continually all year round. Free from 
extreme cold and heat, the climate here nurtures the myriad be¬ 
ings in utmost peace. There are numerous mountains and streams, 
with immortal herbs and clusters of mushrooms. The rivers through¬ 
out the entire continent taste like sweet cream. 

This is by far the best continent. 

Phoenix-Unicorn Continent is in the middle of the Western 
Sea. It is one thousand and five hundred square miles in area and 
is encircled by a weakwater stream, which cannot float a swan’s 
feather or be crossed in any way. 

On this continent there are many phoenixes and unicorns. They 
appear in flocks of several tens of thousands. There are also moun¬ 
tains, rivers, ponds, and grasslands that abound in a hundred vari¬ 
eties of divine medicinal herbs. 

In addition, there are the households of the immortals. They 
boil phoenix bills and unicorn horns together and decoct a glue that 



54 


Creation 


is called “string-connecting glue” or “metal-fusing paste.” This glue 
can connect snapped bowstrings and fuse the metal of broken knives 
and swords. Furthermore, if a strong man were made to pull on 
something mended by the glue, it would only break somewhere 
else, and never along the mended seam. . . . 

[5b] Cave Continent is in the southwest of the Western Sea. It is 
three thousand square miles in area. In the north it overlaps Kunlun 
for two hundred and sixty thousand miles. It lies two hundred and 
forty thousand miles from the eastern shore of the ocean. [6a] 

On this continent there are many palaces and mansions of 
perfected immortals and spirit officials. Their number cannot be 
counted. There are also wondrous lions, scare-evils, chisel-teeth, 
heaven-deer, and beasts with long fangs, bronze heads, and iron 
foreheads. 

The continent features a large mountain formed in the shape 
of people and birds; hence it is called the “People and Bird Moun¬ 
tain.” On this mountain grow many large trees that resemble 
maples, but the fragrance of their flowers and leaves may be smelled 
hundreds of miles away. They are called Soul-Returning Trees. 

Knock on one and it can actually produce a sound by itself that 
seems like a herd of cattle bellowing. Those who hear it tremble in 
their hearts and are startled in their spirits. 

Yet one can also dig up its root, boil it in a jade cauldron, 
remove the water, fry the remainder under low heat until it be¬ 
comes like a black goo, and then shape it into pellets. 

The product is called Essence-Alarming Incense, but some also 
call it Spirit-Shaking Pellets, Life-Restoring Incense, Quaking 
Sandalwood Incense, People-and-Bird Essence, or Death-Dispelling 
Incense. This single item with six names is a wondrous thing. Its 
fragrance may be smelled several hundred miles away. [6b] The 
dead in the earth who smell this incense return to life and do not 
perish again. Perfuming the dead with it is even more efficacious. .. . 

[10b] Peng Hill is Mount Penglai. It faces the northeast shore 
of the Eastern Sea and is five thousand miles in circumference. 

On its periphery the mountain is surrounded by the Circular 
Sea. The water of the Circular Sea is perfectly black, so it is also 
called the Dark Sea. Even when there is no wind, its waves are a 
hundred fathoms high. It cannot be crossed in either direction. 

On the mountain are the palaces of the Nine Elders and the 
Perfected Kings of the Nine Heavens. Only flying immortals can 
reach the places where these most exalted perfected reside. 



8. Gods and Goddesses 


55 


Kunlun is also called Kun Mountain. It lies west-northwest of 
the Western Sea and north-northwest of the Northern Sea. It is ten 
thousand square miles in area and is located one hundred and 
thirty thousand miles from the coast. 

Like Phoenix-Unicorn Continent, Kunlun also is completely 
surrounded by a weakwater stream. The mountain borders on four 
surrounding mountains: in the southeast there is the Orchard of 
Assembled Rocks; in the northwest, the Mansion of the Northern 
House. In the northeast, it borders on the Great Sparkling Well; in 
the southwest, it extends to the Deep Basin Ravine. 

These large mountains on its four corners are actually the 
branches and supports of Kunlun. The southern tip of the Orchard 
of Assembled Rocks is where the Queen Mother told King Mu of 
Zhou that his capital, Xianyang, was four hundred and sixty thou¬ 
sand miles away . 

The mountain rises thirty-six thousand miles above the sur¬ 
rounding plain. [11a] Its top has three corners and is ten thousand 
miles wide. It is shaped like a hanging bowl. Its base is narrow and 
its top wide, thus it is called Kunlun, “high and precarious.” 

As for the mountain’s three corners, one is due north and shines 
with the brilliance of a thousand stars. Hence it is called the Peak 
of Lofty Winds. One corner is due west and is named the Hall of 
the Hanging Gardens. One corner is due east and is called the 
Kunlun Palace. 

On this latter corner there are heaps of gold which make up 
the Heavenly Walled City. It is one thousand square miles in area. 
In the city there are five golden terraces and twelve jade towers. 

North of this, there are the Mansion of the Northern House 
and the Deep Basic Ravine. They also have walled cities with golden 
terraces and jade towers. All these illuminate each other like the 
pervading radiance of flowing essence. 

There are also halls of luminescent green jade, mansions 
of carnelian florescence, purple, halcyon, and cinnabar man¬ 
sions, phosphorescent clouds, a candle sun, and vermilion clouds 
of ninefold radiance. This is the place governed by the Queen 
Mother of the West and revered by perfected officials and immor¬ 
tal beings. 


8. Gods and Goddesses 


The gods, as much as the lands of the immortals, are part of 
the pure realm of the Tao. Next in rank after the highest deities of 



56 


Creation 


the religion, who themselves are none other than the Tao—the 
Heavenly Venerable of Primordial Beginning, the Lord of the Tao, 
the Highest Venerable Lord—are the pure representatives of yin 
and yang. Divided according to the system of the five agents into 
male and female, east and west, wood and metal, light and dark, 
up and down, they are embodied in two deities: the Lord King of 
the East and the Queen Mother of the West. 

The pair developed first in the Han dynasty (206 b.c.e.-220 
C.E.), when the system of the five agents became the general basis 
for Chinese thought. While the Queen Mother was known as a 
powerful deity before, associated with fanciful lands and a rather 
strange, tiger-like appearance, the Lord King developed as her coun¬ 
terpart to fit the overall system. 

The Queen Mother is particularly powerful. Residing in the 
Heavenly Walled City on Mount Kunlun, she is the queen of all the 
immortals. She is also the chief guardian of the elixir of life and the 
peaches of immortality that grow in her garden and ripen once in 
3,000 years. She is truly highest among the celestials. 

The following biography of the Queen Mother of the West 
(Xiwang mu) is contained in the Yongcheng jixian lu (Record of the 
Assembled Immortals of the Heavenly Walled City). Written by Du 
Guangting (850-933), eminent court Taoist, liturgist, and chroni¬ 
cler of the late Tang, this text concentrates on the biographies of 
goddesses, lady immortals, and successful female practitioners. It 
is unique in this focus. 

The text is contained in DZ 783, fasc. 560-61 and in Yunji 
qiqian 114. Only the first few pages are rendered below (1.9a-llb). 
A full translation with detailed annotation is contained in Cahill 
1982. For more on the history of the text, see Cahill 1986. On Du 
Guangting, his life and works, see Verellen 1989. On the Yellow 
Emperor and his battle with the Wormy Rebel, see Lewis 1990. For 
studies of the Queen Mother and other Chinese goddesses, see 
Schafer 1973, Loewe 1979, Cahill 1982, Fracasso 1988, Chan 1990. 
On the practice of women in Taoism, see Cahill 1990, Despeux 
1990, Kirkland 1991. 


“The Queen Mother of the West” (Xiwang mu), from Yong¬ 
cheng jixian lu (Record of the Assembled Immortals of the 
Heavenly Walled City) 

[9a] The goddess Mother of Metal is the Ninefold Numinous 
and Greatly Wondrous Mother of Metal of Tortoise Mountain. Some- 



8. Gods and Goddesses 


57 


times she is also called the Greatly Numinous and Ninefold Radi¬ 
ant Mother of Metal of Tortoise Terrace. Another common name of 
hers is Queen Mother of the West. She is, in fact, the incarnate 
wondrousness of the innermost power of the west, the ultimate 
venerable of all-pervading yin-energy. 

In old times, the energy of the Tao congealed in quietude and 
deepened into an organized structure. Resting in non-action, it de¬ 
sired to unfold and guide the mysterious accomplishments of cre¬ 
ation, to bring forth and raise the myriad beings. 

First it took the perfected true energy of the innermost power 
of the east and transformed it into the Lord of Wood. The Lord of 
Wood was born on the shore of the Bluegreen Sea, in the void of 
fresh-green spiritual power. [9b] Born from the energy of highest 
yang harmony, he rules in the east. Because of this, he is also 
called the Lord King of the East. 

Then the Tao took the perfected wondrous energy of the inner¬ 
most power of the west and transformed it into the Mother of 
Metal. The Mother of Metal was born on the shore of Yonder River 
on the Divine Continent. Jue is her surname, and Kou the clan to 
which she belongs. As soon as she was born, she soared up in flight. 
Born from the energy of highest yin spiritual power, she rules in 
the west. Because of this she is also called the Queen Mother of the 
West. 

In the beginning, she derived her substance from great 
nonbeing. She floated along in spirit and was mysteriously hidden 
in the midst of the west’s confused chaos of primordial energy. 
Then she divided the pure essential energy of the great Tao, to 
connect it back together again and form herself a body. 

She and the Lord King of Wood and the East rule the two 
primal energies [yin and yang], nourish and raise heaven and earth, 
mold and develop the myriad beings. 

The Queen Mother embodies the deepest foundation of the 
weak and yielding; she represents the origin of the ultimate yin. 
Therefore she rules over the direction of the west. She mothers and 
nourishes all kinds of beings, whether in heaven above or on the 
earth below, whether in any of the three worlds or in any of the ten 
directions. Especially all women who ascend to immortality and 
attain the Tao are her dependents. 

The palaces and towers she resides in are located on Pestle 
Mountain in the Tortoise Mountain Range, in the splendid parks of 
Mount Kunlun with its hanging gardens and lofty atmosphere. 
[10a] Here there is a golden city a thousand levels high, with twelve- 











8. Gods and Goddesses 


59 


storied jade buildings and towers of jasper essence. There are halls 
of radiant lucid jade, nine-storied mysterious terraces, and purple 
kingfisher cinnabar chambers. 

On the left, the palace compound is surrounded by the Fairy 
Pond; on the right, it is ringed by the Kingfisher River. Beneath the 
mountain, the weakwater stream rushes along in nine layers, its 
waves and swells a hundred thousand feet high. Without a whirl¬ 
wind carriage on feathered wheels, no one can ever reach here. 

The jade towers rise up all the way into the heavens; the 
luscious terraces reach into the empyrean. The buildings’ eaves are 
of green gems; the chambers inside of vermilion-purple stone. Joined 
gems make colorful curtains, while a steady bright moon irradiates 
them on all four sides. 

The Queen Mother wears a flowered sheng headdress and has 
marvelous ornaments suspended from her belt. Her attendants on 
the left are immortal maidens; her attendants on the right are 
feathered lads. Gem-studded canopies glimmer with their mutual 
reflections; feathered banners shade the courtyard. 

Beneath the balustrades and staircases of the palaces, the 
grounds are planted with white bracelet trees and a cinnabar dia¬ 
mond forest. There are a myriad stalks of emptiness-pure greenery, 
a thousand stems of turquoise-jade trees. Even when there is no 
wind, the divine reeds spontaneously harmonize sounds, clinking 
like jade belt-pendants. They naturally produce the spheric tim¬ 
bres of the eight harmonies. 

The Divine Continent where the Queen Mother was born is 
southeast of Mount Kunlun. Thus the Erya Dictionary claims: “The 
land of the Queen Mother of the West is directly beneath the sun. 
This place and the subsolar land are the same.” It also says: “The 
Queen Mother has disheveled hair and wears a sheng headdress. 
She has tiger’s teeth and is good at whistling.” [10b] Now, this 
describes really the Queen Mother’s envoy, the white tiger spirit of 
the direction of metal. Such are not in fact the Queen Mother’s true 
looks! 

To ensure her power, the Heavenly King of Primordial Begin¬ 
ning bestowed upon her the primordial lineage record of the myriad 
heavens and the Tortoise Mountain registers of ninefold radiance. 
He empowered her to control and summon the myriad spirit forces 
of the universe, to assemble and gather the perfected and the sages 
of the world, to oversee all covenants and examine the people’s 
quality of faith. 




Fig. 6. The Queen Mother of the West. Source: Zengxiang liexian zhuan. 























8. Gods and Goddesses 


61 


Moreover, she presides over all formal observances in the vari¬ 
ous heavens as well as at all audiences and banquets held by the 
celestial worthies and supreme sages. In addition, it is her duty to 
supervise the correcting and editing of the sacred scriptures in 
heaven, to reflect due divine light on the proceedings. Her responsi¬ 
bility covers all the treasured scriptures of Highest Clarity, the 
jade writs of the Three Caverns, as well as the sacred texts that 
are bestowed at ordination. 

Formerly the Yellow Emperor [Huangdi] punished the Wormy 
Rebel [Chiyou] when he rose and usurped power. Before he was 
subdued, the Wormy Rebel brought forth many magical transfor¬ 
mations. He raised the wind, summoned the rain, puffed forth 
smoke, and spat mist, so that the generals and soldiers of the 
Yellow Emperor’s army were greatly confused. Thereupon the em¬ 
peror returned home and rested in a valley of Mount Tai. Bewil¬ 
dered, he lay down in deep distress. 

Seeing his plight, the Queen Mother sent out an envoy wear¬ 
ing a dark fox cloak to give him a talisman. It said: 

Great Unity just ahead! 

Heavenly Unity just behind! 

Obtain it and excel! 

Attack and overcome! 

The talisman was three inches wide and one foot long. It shone 
like jade with a greenish lustre. Cinnabar drops like blood formed 
a glistening pattern on it. The Yellow Emperor hung it at his waist. 

[11a] When he had done this, the Queen Mother commanded a 
woman with a human head and the body of a bird to go to him. She 
introduced herself as the Mysterious Lady of the Nine Heavens 
and gave the emperor the plan of cosmic yin and yang. This in¬ 
cluded information also on the five basic human intentions and the 
three palaces within. In addition, she bestowed upon him various 
arts: how to calculate the times of attack and withdrawal with the 
help of Great Unity and how to control all space and time through 
pacing the Northern Dipper in the sky. Beyond that, she taught 
him the way to use a number of talismans of concealment, the five 
divine talismans of the Numinous Treasure, and the divine writ 
ensuring the five kinds of victory. 

Thus equipped, the Yellow Emperor easily subdued the Wormy 
Rebel in Middleland [Zhongji]. He then destroyed the descendents 
of the Divine Farmer and executed the Fiery Emperor’s great- 



62 


Creation 


grandson at Blockspring [Banquan], Thereafter all under heaven 
was greatly at peace. 

The Yellow Emperor then built his capital at Dripping Deer 
[Zhuolu] in the Upper Valley. After he had thus been settled peace¬ 
fully for a number of years, he received another envoy from the 
Queen Mother. This time the white tiger spirit came to him. Riding 
a white tiger, he descended to the emperor’s courtyard. He be¬ 
stowed upon him the cosmic maps of the unified empire. 

Toward the end of his years, the Queen Mother moreover gave 
him the perfect true Tao of purity, tranquility, and non-action. Its 
instructions were: 

Do not stop drinking and gobbling up food—and your body 
will never be light. 

Do not stop fretting and worrying—and your spirit will 
never be pure. 

Do not stop craving for sounds and sights—and your heart 
will never be calm. 

No calm in your heart—and your spirit will never be 
numinous. 

No numen in your spirit—and the Tao cannot work its 
wonders. 

Success is not in homage to the stars or worship of the 
Dipper. 

[lib] That rather makes you suffer and exhausts your body. 

Success is in deepening the spirit powers of your heart. 

There is no effort needed—the Tao of immortality is there! 


Now you can live long! 



Chapter Three 


THE TEACHING 


The teaching is another aspect of the Tao as it is active and 
visible in the world; in fact it is the one aspect of the Tao that is 
readily accessible if one only looks for it. Although beyond lan¬ 
guage, shape, or any other form of expression, the Tao as it de¬ 
scends into the realm of humanity takes on a whole number of 
different guises to save living beings. 

In language, the Tao becomes manifest in the scriptures that 
we have on earth—translations or replicas of their original heav¬ 
enly counterpart. These scriptures, revealed at different times and 
to members of different traditions within Taoism, are then com¬ 
piled in to an organized canon. This canon also contains explana¬ 
tions of the scriptures, commentaries from various ages and 
backgrounds, encomia for the gods, descriptions of proper ritual 
procedures, instructions for physical and meditation practice, bio¬ 
graphies of great masters, records of lineages, and so on. The Tao 
thus formulated is an encyclopedic collection of information, equally 
containing materials of varied levels of sacrality. 

In its concrete shape, the Tao further appears as Laozi, per¬ 
sonification of the Tao and first deity of the religion. In his various 
exploits around the world, called the “transformations of Laozi” 
because he never stays the same for long, the god establishes and 
reestablishes the teaching. He reveals scriptures, hands down ex¬ 
planations and instructions, appoints community leaders, and guides 
promising individuals along the path. Laozi gives shape to the Tao 
in several ways. He spreads the teaching in whatever form and 
time he may appear; he provides a concrete example for the eter¬ 
nal, never ending changes of the Tao itself; and he furnishes a 
model life for the active believer in his pursuit of the Tao. Laozi 
personifies the Tao; his transformations and ongoing conversions of 


63 



64 


The Teaching 


all parts of the universe keep the teaching alive and give hope and 
confidence to the believers. 

In other forms of expression, the Tao is accessible in the con¬ 
crete physical and meditational practices of the active Taoist. This 
is the teaching come to life, the Tao in its most personal, most 
immediate form on earth. Integrating numerous different of medi¬ 
cal and religious techniques, Taoist religious practices are a varie¬ 
gated mixture of activities that continue to change with the times 
and different schools. But in all cases a distinct path is outlined, a 
path that usually involves leaving ordinary society and its customs 
behind, at least for a time; reorganizing one’s life according to yin 
and yang, the most pervasive rhythm of the Tao; healing the body; 
developing control over one’s wandering mind; and joining the Tao 
in some form of union, ecstatic or otherwise. 

While the collection of Taoist scriptural materials and the figure 
of the deity Laozi tend to be inclusive, if not actually universalist, 
the practices differ—different schools place emphasis on different 
techniques, and individual practitioners prefer certain methods over 
others. From age to age, from school to school, the canon developed 
and grew—is still growing in supplements today. Likewise, when¬ 
ever a new religion appeared on the horizon of the Chinese empire, 
Laozi was made responsible for it; it was integrated under the 
overarching umbrella of the Tao. At the same time, practices changed 
and developed; some techniques were lost, others found, the com¬ 
posite pattern of their combination always in flux. 

The selection below takes these differences into account. It be¬ 
gins with the Daojiao sandong zongyuan (The Ancestral Origin of 
the Three Caverns of the Taoist Teaching), which gives a summary 
of the organization of the Taoist canon and reports on its heavenly 
nature. Contained in the Yunji qiqian, the text dates probably to the 
Tang dynasty, but its description is valid for Taoist collections from 
their first compilations in the fifth century to today. 

Second, there is the first chapter of the Huahu jing (Scripture 
on the Conversion of the Barbarians), a popular text in medieval 
China that was proscribed several times due to its polemical nature 
and has only survived in a Dunhuang manuscript. Dating from the 
eighth century, it shows Taoist universalism at its best, presenting 
the transformations and migrations of Laozi throughout history. 

Two documents on the path follow. The first, the Tianyinzi 
(The Master of Heavenly Seclusion), is a summary of the path as it 
was undertaken in mid-Tang times. It is one of the first texts that 



9. The Three Caverns 


65 


clearly integrate the entire gamut of Taoist practices into one orga¬ 
nized structure. It is also one of the clearest—the reason probably 
why it is still used among Qigong practitioners in China today. 

The other contains the basic principles of the monastic school 
of Complete Perfection (Quanzhen) as they were set out by its 
founder, Wang Chongyang (1113-1170) in the twelfth century. The 
Chongyang lijiao shiwu lun (Chongyang’s Fifteen Articles on Es¬ 
tablishing the Teaching) outlines the major points aspiring Taoist 
practitioners must pay attention to. It integrates Buddhist 
monachism and places a heavy emphasis on the practice of inner 
alchemy. Quanzhen being one of the two major Taoist schools still 
active today, this text too has lost nothing of its practical relevance. 


9. The Three Caverns 

The Taoist canon that we have today was printed in 1445. 
While there are several supplements, one from the seventeenth, 
the other from the twentieth century, this canon represents the 
major stock of Taoist materials. It goes back to the collective activ¬ 
ity of leading Taoists under the Ming dynasty (1368-1644) and 
replaces earlier versions that suffered from a persecution under 
the Mongol (Yuan) rulers in the 1280s. 

Comprehensive canons, both Taoist and Buddhist, were first 
compiled upon imperial order in the late tenth century. At this time 
the Song dynasty had just reunified the empire and was beginning 
to stabilize its rule. As part of this effort, the rulers tried to salvage 
as much of the country’s cultural heritage as was possible after two 
hundred years of disorder and political division. Many encyclope¬ 
dias were compiled at this time. The Yunji qiqian, from which our 
text is taken, is one of them. 

Before the Song, there were comprehensive collections of the 
teaching as well as lists of scriptures that integrated all the materi¬ 
als of a given tradition into an organized whole. In Taoism, the first 
of these is a catalogue compiled by Lu Xiujing (406-77) in the fifth 
century. It arranges the scriptures in the so-called Three Caverns, 
each representing one of the leading schools of Taoism at the time. 

The Cavern of Perfection contained the scriptures of Highest 
Clarity (Shangqing); that of Mystery, the texts of Numinous Trea¬ 
sure (Lingbao); and that of Spirit, the talismans and explanations 
of the Three Sovereigns (Sanhuang). The first and oldest of all 



66 


The Teaching 


Taoist schools, the Orthodox Unity (Zhengyi) or Celestial Masters 
(Tianshi), was relegated to the supplements. This division, pat¬ 
terned on the Buddhist doctrine of the Three Vehicles, has per¬ 
sisted to the present day. 

The Daojiao sandong zongyuan (The Ancestral Origin of the 
Three Caverns of the Taoist Teaching) provides a religious and mytho¬ 
logical backgound for the origins and organization of the canon. The 
text is contained in Yunji qiqian 3.4b-7b. It has not been translated 
elsewhere. Section divisions and subheadings are the translator’s. 

On the organization and historical development of the Taoist 
canon, see Liu 1973, Ofuchi 1979, Thompson 1985a, Boltz 1987. 


Daojiao sandong zongyuan (The Ancestral Origin of the 
Three Caverns of the Taoist Teaching) 

The Origins 

[4b] In its very first origins, the Taoist school began from that 
which cannot be preceded. It was handed down through spontane¬ 
ous impulse and response. Like the world itself, it arose from the 
wondrous unity of all. From wondrous unity it divided into the 
Three Primes. From the Three Primes it transformed and devel¬ 
oped into the three energies—original, beginning, and mysterious. 
From the three energies it changed to bring forth the three forces— 
heaven, earth, and humanity. When the three forces were com¬ 
plete, the myriad beings were created. 

The Three Primes are: first, the Prime of the Great Nonbeing 
of Coagulated Pervasion; second, the Prime of the Great Nonbeing 
of Red Chaos; third, the Prime of the Mysterious Pervasion of Dark 
Obscurity. 

From the first, the Prime of the Great Non-Being of Coagu¬ 
lated Pervasion, developed the Lord of Heavenly Treasure. From 
the second, the Prime of the Great Nonbeing of Red Chaos, devel¬ 
oped the Lord of Numinous Treasure. From the third, the Prime of 
the Mysterious Pervasion of Dark Obscurity, developed the Lord of 
Spirit Treasure. In the manifestations of the great omnipresent 
pervasion [of the Tao], they were transformed into separate enti¬ 
ties. They rule the Three Clarity Heavens. 

The Three Clarity Heavens are Jade Clarity, Highest Clarity, 
and Great Clarity. [5a] They are also known as the three heavens. 
As such they are also called the Heaven of Clear Subtlety, the 
Heaven of the Remnants of Yu, and the Heaven of Great Redness. 





9. The Three Caverns 


67 


The Lord of Heavenly Treasure rules Jade Clarity. This is the 
Heaven of Clear Subtlety. Its energy is beginning and of greenish 
coloring. 

The Lord of Numinous Treasure rules Highest Clarity. This is 
the Heaven of the Remnants of Yu. Its energy is primordial and of 
yellowish coloring. 

The Lord of Spirit Treasure rules Great Clarity. This is the 
Heaven of Great Redness. Its energy is mysterious and of whitish 
coloring. 

Thus the Verses on the Vitalization of the Gods of the Nine 
Heavens say: “Although these three have different names, they are 
ultimately one.” 

The Scriptures 

These three lords each rule certain sections of the teaching. 
Venerable deities, they govern the three caverns. These Three Cav¬ 
erns are the Cavern of Perfection, the Cavern of Mystery, and the 
Cavern of Spirit. 

The Lord of Heavenly Treasure revealed scriptures in twelve 
sections. Thereby he became the ruler of the teachings of the Per¬ 
fection Cavern. 

The Lord of Numinous Treasure revealed scriptures in twelve 
sections. Thereby he became the ruler of the teachings of the Mys¬ 
tery Cavern. 

The Lord of Spirit Treasure revealed scriptures in twelve sec¬ 
tions. Thereby he became the ruler of the teachings of the Spirit 
Cavern. 

All in all there are therefore thirty-six sections of sacred scrip¬ 
tures in the Three Caverns. 

The first, the Perfection Cavern, represents the Greater Ve¬ 
hicle. [5b] The second, the Mystery Cavern, represents the Middle 
Vehicle. The third, the Spirit Cavern, represents the Lesser 
Vehicle. 

On the basis of the Three Caverns, altogether seven divisions 
of the canon developed. The Cavern of Perfection, the Cavern of 
Mystery, and the Cavern of Spirit are supplemented by the divi¬ 
sions of Great Mystery, Great Peace, and Great Clarity. 

Great Mystery supplements the Perfection Cavern; Great Peace 
supplements the Mystery Cavern; and Great Clarity supplements 
the Spirit Cavern. The three supplements together also contain 
thirty-six sections of sacred scriptures. 



68 


The Teaching 


The Covenant of Orthodox Unity pervades all of them. It forms 
the seventh division, which is also the fourth supplement. Because 
of this we speak of sacred scriptures contained in the Three Cav¬ 
erns and of mysterious teachings found in Seven Divisions. Beyond 
these Seven Divisions, the texts of the canon are further divided 
according to twelve classes: 

1. Fundamental Texts 

2. Divine Talismans 

3. Secret Instructions 

4. Numinous Charts 

5. Genealogies and Registers 

6. Precepts and Regulations 

7. Rituals and Observances 

8. Techniques and Methods 

9. Various Arts 

10. Records and Biographies 

11. Eulogies and Encomia 

12. Lists and Memoranda 

Each of the Three Caverns contains these twelve sections. All 
in all, there are thus thirty-six sections of scriptures. 

The Energies 

The three energies are the beginning, primordial, and mysteri¬ 
ous. [6a] 

Beginning energy is green and resides in the Heaven of Clear 
Subtlety. 

Primordial energy is yellow and resides in the Heaven of the 
Remnants of Yu. 

Mysterious energy is white and resides in the Heaven of Great 
Redness. 

Therefore we speak of the three energies—beginning, primor¬ 
dial, and mysterious. 

From these three energies, yin and yang and their harmonious 
combination first developed. 

From yin and yang and their harmonious combination, heaven 
and earth and humanity developed in their turn. 

Just as the Daode jing says. 



9. The Three Caverns 


69 


Tao brought forth the One. 

The One brought forth the Two. 

The Two brought forth the Three. 

The Three brought forth the myriad beings, (ch. 42). 

The Heavens 

Including the highest heaven with the Jade Capital of Mystery 
Metropolis, there are altogether thirty-six heavens. Of these, twenty- 
eight are within the Three Worlds, and eight are beyond them. The 
Three Worlds are the World of Desire, the World of Form, and the 
World of Formlessness. 

The lowest six heavens make up the World of Desire. The 
following eighteen heavens are the World of Form. The four heav¬ 
ens above them constitute the World of Formlessness. Thus there 
are altogether twenty-eight heavens in the Three Worlds. 

The Three Worlds are beautiful places where people can be 
upright and develop their strength. Once above the World of De¬ 
sire, human life is extended considerably. On these higher levels, 
the ground is made of yellow gold; stairs are made of white jade. 
Pearls, jades, and valuable treasures occur naturally. [6b] Yet, al¬ 
though there is exceeding pleasure and happiness, people in these 
worlds still have not yet transcended the cycle of life and death. 

This happens only above the Three Worlds. There are first four 
heavens called the Heavens for True Believers. These are also known 
as the Heavens of Sagely Disciples or the four Brahma Heavens. In 
these realms people have gone beyond life and death. The three 
calamities cannot reach them. 

Above these are the three Clarity Heavens. They each house 
three palaces on the right, the left, and the center. These three 
palaces contain the heavenly hierarchy of immortal kings, dukes, 
ministers, earls, and officials. They are each governed by a Celes¬ 
tial Master, appointed by the Highest Venerable Lord. 

Great Clarity contains the nine ranks of the immortals; High¬ 
est Clarity contains the nine ranks of the perfected; Jade Clarity 
contains the nine ranks of the sages. Altogether the heavenly hier¬ 
archy thus consists of twenty-seven ranks. 

The nine ranks of immortals are: 

1. Highest Immortal 

2. Outstanding Immortal 

3. Grand Immortal 



70 


The Teaching 


4. Mysterious Immortal 

5. Heavenly Immortal 

6. Perfected Immortal 

7. Spirit Immortal 

8. Numinous Immortal 

9. Superior Immortal 

The titles in the hierarchies of the perfected and the sages 
follow the same pattern. Their order of rank is equally that of 
highest, outstanding, grand, mysterious, heavenly, perfected, spirit, 
numinous, and superior. [7a] 

The highest heaven of all is called Grand Network. It contains 
the Jade Capital of Mystery Metropolis. Golden towers of purple 
subtlety, soaring trees of the seven treasures, cosmic unicorns and 
wondrous lions live in this realm. From here the heavenly venerables 
of the Three Worlds rule and administer the universe. 

Thus altogether there are first the twenty-eight heavens of the 
Three Worlds followed by the four Brahma Heavens; above them 
there are the three Clarity Heavens, crowned in their turn by the 
Heaven of Grand Network. Thus there are altogether thirty-six 
heavens. They are governed by the three venerables. 

As the Scripture says: “Above the Three Worlds, all is without 
bounds. None is higher than Grand Network. Colorful layers of 
clouds rise loftily above. There is only primordial beginning. People 
live for kalpas on end.” 

The Heavenly Venerables 

The Heavenly Venerables of the Three Periods are: 

of the past, the Heavenly Venerable of Primordial Beginning; 

of the present, the Heavenly Venerable Jade Emperor On-High; 

of the future, the Heavenly Venerable Jade Constellation of the 
Golden Tower. 

Now, the Jade Emperor On-High is the disciple of the Heav¬ 
enly Venerable of Primordial Beginning. Ever since the middle of 
the kalpa Highest Sovereign, the Heavenly Venerable of Primordial 
Beginning has presided in spirit over the three periods. He has ten 
names: 

1. Spontaneity 

2. Non-Ultimate 

3. Great Tao 



10. The Transformations of Laozi 


71 


4. Highest Perfection 

5. Lord On-High 

6. Lord of the Tao 

7. Lofty August One 

8. Heavenly Venerable 

9. Jade Emperor 

10. His Majesty 

[Such is the ancestral origin of the Three Caverns.] 


10. The Transformations of Laozi 

The myth of Laozi’s transformations was part of his deification 
in the Han dynasty. It is first formulated in the Laozi bianhua jing 
(Scripture on Laozi’s Transformations), a text dated to the second 
century c.e. that has survived among the Dunhuang manuscripts. 

Dunhuang is an ancient place along the silk road which was 
under siege in the wars at the end of the Tang. At this time, resi¬ 
dent monks sealed a large number of manuscripts as well as in¬ 
valuable artworks in its caves. The caves were discovered and opened 
by Western explorers in the early twentieth century and have since 
continued to provide a wealth of authentic information on the life 
and religion of medieval China. 

The Huahu jing (Scripture on the Conversion of the Barbar¬ 
ians) too survived in Dunhuang. First compiled around the year 
300, the text contains a polemical attack against Buddhism. It 
claims that when Laozi left China after transmitting the Daode 
jing he continued his wanderings throughout Central and South 
Asia. Everywhere he went, he converted the people to the Tao, 
appearing as the Buddha to them. The various religious rules of 
Buddhism, then, were created by him to civilize the “barbarians.” 

As time went on, the text was countered, proscribed, and re¬ 
written. It continued to lay claim to all kinds of teachings, includ¬ 
ing the philosophy of Confucius and the Christianity of Mani. The 
text translated below consists of the first chapter of this longer 
scripture. It dates probably from the early eighth century, the time 
when Manichaeism was first acknowledged by the imperial court. 
It is today contained in the Buddhist canon, no. 2139 of the Taisho 
edition (54.1266b-67b). Its full title is Laozi xisheng huahu jing 
xushuo (Introduction to the Scripture of Laozi’s Ascension to the 
West and Conversion of the Barbarians). Section division and sub¬ 
headings are the translator’s. 



72 


The Teaching 


This text has not been translated to date. For studies of the 
conversion story, see Ziircher 1959, Seidel 1984, Reiter 1990, Kohn 
1989d, 1991. On the deification of Laozi, see Seidel 1969. 


Huahu jing (On the Conversion of the Barbarians), Intro¬ 
duction. 

Birth and Vow 

[1266b] In those days, in the reign of Tangjia of Yin [King 
Yangjia, 1408-1401 b.c.e.] with the yearstar in gengshen, in the 
month [ ], the Highest Venerable Lord came down from the eter¬ 

nal realm of the Tao. He harnessed a cloud of three energies and 
strode on the essence of the sun. Following the rays of the nine 
luminaries, he entered into the mouth of the Jade Maiden of Mys¬ 
tery and Wonder. Taking refuge in her womb, he became a man. 

In the year gengchen, on the fifteenth day of the second month, 
he was born in Bo. Nine dragons sprinkled water over him to rinse 
and wash his body; then they transformed into nine springs. 

At that time, the Venerable Lord had white hair. He was able to 
walk upon birth. A lotus flower spouted under each step he took. 
After nine steps, he pointed to heaven with his left hand, to the 
earth with his right hand and announced to the people: “In heaven 
above, on the earth below, I alone am venerable. I shall reveal the 
highest law of the Tao. I shall save all things moving and growing, 
the entire host of living beings. I shall wander across the ten direc¬ 
tions and reach to the dark prisons of the underworld. I shall lead all 
those not yet saved and all those lost in error to certain salvation.” 

Hidden and apparent among humanity, he served as the teacher 
of dynasties. Reaching in position to the Great Ultimate itself, he is 
highest among gods and immortals. 

At the time of birth he possessed a naturally beautiful body. He 
was clad in heavenly garments, a divine fragrance pervaded his rooms, 
and brilliant sunlight radiated from him. In nine days, his body grew 
nine feet. Everybody, startled and amazed, recognized him for a sage. 

Since he was born with the appearance of old age, he was 
called Laozi, “Old Child.” The gods of heaven in the void, however, 
praise him with ten different titles. They are; 

Highest Venerable Lord 

Highest Venerable of Perfect Spirit and the Wisdom of Nonbeing 

Teacher of Emperors and Kings 


10. The Transformations of Laozi 


73 


Great Officer 

Great Venerable among Immortals 

Father of Heavenly Beings 

Highest One of Non-Action 

Benevolent Master of Great Compassion 

Heavenly Venerable of Primordial Beginning 
Old Child 

The Decline of the Zhou 

Laozi concentrated his spirit and obscured his traces. He con¬ 
verted all people under heaven and explained to them the essential 
as well as the general methods of self-cultivation. 

After more than a hundred years, the way of the king declined. 
He killed all those of wisdom and goodness and committed brutal 
atrocities without number. All the loyal ministers who tried to re¬ 
monstrate were executed. Heaven sent down floods and fires [as 
warnings], but the king did not understand. Like this, things went 
on for several years. The end of the Zhou was imminent. 

Thus Laozi, under the reign of King Kang [1078-1052 b.c.e.], 
with the yearstar in jiazi, joined the common officials. [1266c] To 
obscure his presence and hide his name, he became an archivist of 
the Zhou. Thus he still served the dynasty as a teacher. Then, 
under the reign of King Zhao [1052-1001 b.c.e.], with the yearstar 
in guichou, he decided to go west. 

Revelation 

Crossing the Hangu Pass, he transmitted the Scripture of the 
Tao and the Virtue in 5,000 words, the Wondrous True Scripture of 
Western Ascension, and other sacred texts to Yin Xi [the Guardian 
of the Pass]. 

In addition, he taught him the highest methods of Great Clar¬ 
ity, the true writ of the Three Caverns, the talismans and charts of 
Numinous Treasure, the application of Great Mystery, and other 
secret ways. He ordered Yin Xi to teach these to people of utmost 
purity and humanity, so that they could undergo the transforma¬ 
tion of wings and become spirit immortals. He commanded him to 
never let the transmission be interrupted. 

With this he crossed over to the west. Passing through the 
floating sands, he reached the town of Bimo in the land of Khotan. 

At that time, he raised his Tathagata staff and summoned all 
his followers. They appeared in an instant: There were Master 



74 


The Teaching 


Redpine, the Elder of the Yellow Center, the Heavenly King of 
Primordial Beginning, the Goddess of the Great One, the Jade 
Maiden of the Six Heavenly Branches, the Divine Lord of the Eight 
Trigrams, the dragon and tiger lords, as well as large numbers of 
meritorious celestial officials. 



Fig. 7. Laozi Meets Yin Xi, the Guardian of the Pass. Source: 
Zengxiang liexian zhuan. 


















10. The Transformations of Laozi 


75 


In addition, there were the lads of the Golden Carriage, and 
those of the Benevolent Radiance, the officials of heaven and earth, 
as well as all the rulers of water and air, the sun and the moon, of 
mountains and the sea. There were the governors of yin and yang, 
of wood, fire, metal, and earth, as well as the gods of the five sacred 
mountains and the four majestic streams—and many others more. 

Also present were the strongmen of the Heavenly Stems, the 
generals of the Floating Network, the divine kings of the Flying 
Heaven, as well as assorted immortals and jade maidens. All to¬ 
gether there were more than a hundred thousand of them. 

They came riding on clouds, pulled by flying dragons, or floating 
freely through the air. The Venerable Lord thereupon took his place 
behind a jade awning. There he sat on the throne of the Seven 
Treasures. [Attendants] burned incense of a hundred harmonies 
and scattered a multitude of fragrant flowers. Heavenly music was 
played as the wise and sagely of all the heavens came crowding 
around him. 

The Conversion of the Barbarians 

Using his divine powers, he then summoned all the barbarian 
kings. Without question they appeared from far and near. There 
were numerous kings and nobles. . . . [1267a] They all came with 
their wives and concubines, families and other dependents. They 
crowded around the Venerable Lord, coming ever closer in order to 
hear the law. 

At this time the Venerable Lord addressed the assembled bar¬ 
barian kings: 

“Your hearts are full of evil! You engage in killing and harm 
other beings! Since you feed only on blood and meat, you cut short 
manifold lives! 

“Today I will give you the Scripture of the Yaksa Demons. It 
will prohibit meat-eating among you and leave you with a diet of 
wheat and gruel. This will take care of all that slaughter and 
killing! Those among you who cannot desist shall themselves be¬ 
come dead meat! 

“You barbarians are greedy and cruel! You make no difference 
between kin and stranger. You are intent only to satisfy your greed 
and debauchery! Not a trace of mercy or sense of social duty within 
you! 

“Look at you! Your hair and beards are unkempt and too long! 
How can you comb and wash it? Even from a distance you are full 
of rank smell! Bah! How awfully dirty your bodies must be! 



76 


The Teaching 


“Now that you are made to cultivate the Tao all these things 
will be great annoyances to your practice. I therefore order all of 
you to shave off your beards and hair. According to your native 
customs, all your garments are made of felt and fur. By teaching 
you the Lesser Way, I will, by and by, lead you to more cultivated 
manners. In addition, I will give you a number of precepts and 
prohibitions, so that you gradually get to exercise mercy and com¬ 
passion. Each month on the fifteenth day, you shall repent your 
sins.” 

The Origins of Buddhism 

Speaking thus, the Venerable Lord, by means of his divine 
powers, transformed himself into the form of the Buddha and came 
walking through the air. His body was sixteen feet tall and radi¬ 
ated a golden brilliance. His face, constantly turned toward the 
east, revealed his mindfulness of the origin. 

This, as the Venerable Lord explained, is “because I came to 
you from the east.” All those who looked at him thus were made to 
develop intense compassion and good-will in their hearts. “So you 
all, people and kings, will have an image of my face to worship 
every morning. Facing east, you will serve me properly.” 

Not long after this, he went across the Belaturgh Mountains. 
In the mountains there was a deep lake. Poisonous dragons were 
living there. They had already harmed about five hundred mer¬ 
chant travelers who had taken up lodgings on the lakeside. None of 
them survived. 

I [the Venerable Lord] then sent King Koban, ruler of this 
land, to bring the Tao to them. Reaching the lakeside he practiced 
the law, and all the dragon kings were fearful and awed. Changing 
into human beings, they sincerely apologized for their former evils 
and begged the king to take them to another place to live. They did 
not want to harm anyone here any more. Thus, never again was 
anybody harmed there. 

Going south, the Venerable Lord arrived in Wuchang. Peram¬ 
bulating the five heavens, [he recounts,] I entered the country of 
Magadha. My clothes were all white and I had an empty pot in my 
hand. Placing myself in the meditation chamber, I established the 
Buddhist teaching. I was called the Buddha of Purity. All the 
Kshatriya [warriors]. Brahmins, and others worshiped me in order 
to attain the Tao of highest order and perfection. 



10. The Transformations of Laozi 


77 



Fig. 8. Laozi Has Yin Xi Appear to the Barbarian As the Buddha. Source: 
Laojun bashiyi hua tushuo. 


Travels East and West 

After three times eighty years, under the reign of King Mu 
[1001-946 B.C.E.], I returned to the Middle Kingdom of the Xia 
[China]. I went all the way across the land and entered the Eastern 
Sea. There I got as far as [the immortals’ isles of] Penglai and 
Fangzhang and reached even to the Fusang Tree of the sun. 









78 


The Teaching 


[1267b] For a while I stayed at the residence of the Great 
Emperor of Heaven. Here I organized the ranks of the immortals 
and established their proper hierarchy. After the reigns of another 
eight kings and over 240 years had passed, there came the dark 
age of King You. When the yearstar was in xinyou [780 b.c.e.], the 
three majestic rivers were shaken and agitated. This was a sign 
that soon the king’s reign would perish, as the cycles were ap¬ 
proaching the Hundred-and-Six [their end]. Nothing could be done. 

Thus, I crossed over to the west again, teaching and converting 
all the lands. This time I went to the Western Sea, as far as the 
Cave, Floating and Unicorn Continents. There I summoned spirit 
immortals of the ten directions, including the superior among them 
as well as those who had only just attained the Tao. I also called 
the rulers of the underworld as well as those who had not yet 
received the teaching. There, moreover, were the floating scattered 
immortals as well as humans of utmost piety and perfect loyalty. I 
guided them all to salvation. 

All these—over 80,000 people—I measured according to their 
merit and virtue. I weighed them in terms of their karma and 
retribution and accordingly awarded them their proper position in 
the offices of the five grades. Then I set up the twenty-seven ranks 
of the immortals to classify the host of celestials as either immor¬ 
tals, perfected, or highest sages. I furthermore placed them to re¬ 
side either on sacred mountains, in rivers, or in the Three Heavens. 
Thus all were ranked. 

The Historical Buddha 

Another sixty years passed. Under the reign of King Huan, 
with the yearstar in jiazi [700 b.c.e.], in the month yiyin, I ordered 
■^n Xi to stride on the essence of the moon and descend to India. 
There he entered the mouth of the wife of King Suddhodana. Tak¬ 
ing refuge in her, he was born [as a human being] and named 
Siddharta. Rejecting his position as crown prince, he went into the 
mountains and cultivated the Tao. He realized the highest Tao and 
duly was called the Buddha. 

He then set up the twelve syllabaries of the Siddha and trans¬ 
mitted his teaching in more than 30,000 words. Explaining the 
scriptures and precepts in detail, he continued to pursue the High¬ 
est Law. In addition, he destroyed the heterodox sects, all ninety- 
six of them. When he was over seventy, he showed his nirvana to 
the world. 



10. The Transformations of Laozi 


79 


Confucius’s Teachings 

In the time of King Xiang, with the yearstar \nyiyu [600 b.c.e.], 
I again returned to the Middle Kingdom. Teaching and converting 
the people of the world, I gave Confucius his law of rites and 
righteousness. 

After this a king was born who, within sixty years, caused the 
division of the country and had to move the capital. This king was 
without virtue. 

I therefore ascended to Mount Kunlun, and flew up to [the 
Heaven of] Purple Tenuity. Thus, I distributed my energy through¬ 
out the Three Worlds, nourishing them all alike. 

Manichaeism 

Again more than 450 years passed. I strode on the radiant Tao- 
energy of spontaneity and descended from the world of perfection 
and serenity to a country called Sulin in the western jade world. 

Born into a royal family, I became crown prince. But I left my 
family and position to enter the Tao. I was called Mani then. Turn¬ 
ing the great wheel of the law, I proclaimed the True Law of pre¬ 
cepts and regulations, of concentration and wisdom. 

Having thus appeared three times and established two differ¬ 
ent gateways to the teaching, I finally had taught and converted all 
the people of the world. So I let them know the original time had 
come. I would ascend to the World of Light and descend into the 
Realm of Darkness. Wherever there was life, it would follow me 
and thus be saved. 

The Future 

After my life as Mani, five times ninety years will pass. Then 
the golden energy will come to flourish, and my law will arise in its 
fullness. As a sagely image, arising in the west and clad in pure 
multicolored spontaneity, I will then once again enter the Middle 
Kingdom. 

At this time, due to this wondrous effort, the yellow and white 
energies will harmonize. The three teachings will find a great re¬ 
union and be equal. All people will be joined in me, worshiping me 
in the chambers of concentration. Combined in root and stem, the 
teachings all share the same pattern. They all reveal far and wide 
the venerable law of the Latter-day Sage of Great Light. 



80 


The Teaching 


The Taoists of the Middle Kingdom shall then explain cause 
and effect in great detail. They will provide the world with a life 
boat of the Vast and Encompassing Law. Through this all things 
moving and growing, all that contains energy, shall equally be led 
to salvation. This teaching will then be called the Law That Vastly 
Encompasses All. 


11. The Path 

Outlining the Taoist path in five distinct stages and associat¬ 
ing each with a particular form of liberation, the Tianyinzi inte¬ 
grates the different longevity techniques and forms of meditation 
current in the mid-Tang period. The text is associated with Sima 
Chengzhen, famous patriarch of Highest Clarity and leading Taoist 
of his day, but its ultimate authorship remains unclear. Nobody 
quite knows who this elusive Master of Heavenly Seclusion was. 
Still, his synthesis and comprehensive discussion have continued 
to inspire Taoists till today. 

The text is contained in DZ 1026, fasc. 672, but has been ed¬ 
ited many times. The section headings are part of the original. For 
an earlier translation and study of the text, see Kohn 1987a. On 
Sima Chengzhen, see Section 2 (“The Tao in the World”) above. On 
the integrated development of the immortal mind, see Kohn 1990. 


Tianyinzi (The Master of Heavenly Seclusion) 

Introduction 

The path of spirit immortality begins with long life. The start¬ 
ing point for long life is the nourishment of energy. Human beings 
receive energy from heaven and earth, then yin and yang harmo¬ 
nize it. Yin and yang spiritual and empty—this is the mind. Spirit 
and material souls—they govern the mind day and night, during 
waking and sleeping. They make sure the human body is never far 
from the path of immortality. 

I do not know where the Master of Heavenly Seclusion came 
from. He wrote this treatise in eight sections to encompass the 
secret and the wondrous. Things found here cannot be attained 
through study alone. 

There are the various techniques to cultivate and refine body 
and energy, to nourish and harmonize mind and emptiness. Its 
basic concept of “return to the root” goes back to Laozi; the idea of 



11. The Path 


81 


“emitting a radiance” is found with Zhuangzi. Long life and eternal 
vision are indeed in this text. 

I have practiced the techniques of the Tao myself Now I feel 
compassion for the people of the world. They often die untimely 
and do not live out their natural life-spans. Therefore, I decided to 
transmit the teaching to fellow adepts of long life. I have simplified 
it so that it can be practiced and referred to easily. Ever since the 
time of Laozi, there has only been this teaching of the Master of 
Heavenly Seclusion. 

Sima Chengzhen 


1. Spirit Immortality 

All people from birth are endowed with the energy of empti¬ 
ness. Originally their essence and enlightenment are of penetrat¬ 
ing awareness, learning has no obstructions, and the “spirit” is 
pure. Settle this spirit within and let it shine without! You will 
naturally become different from ordinary people. You will be a spirit 
immortal! Yet even as a spirit immortal, you are still human. 

To accomplish spirit immortality you must cultivate the energy 
of emptiness. Never let the common world defile it. Find spirit 
immortality in spontaneously following your nature. Never let false 
views obstruct your path. 

Joy, anger, sadness, happiness, love, hate, and desires are the 
seven perversions of the emotions. Wind, damp, cold, heat, hunger, 
satiation, labor, and idleness are the eight perversions of energy. 
Rid yourself of them! Establish immortality! 

2. Simplicity 

The Book of Changes says: “The way of heaven and earth is 
simple.” What does this mean? 

The Master of Heavenly Seclusion says: “Heaven and earth are 
above my head and beneath my feet. When I open my eyes I can 
see them. I can speak of them without complex devices. Thus I say: 
Consummate simplicity is the virtue of immortality.” 

What path should be used to seek this? He says: “Without seek¬ 
ing you cannot know; without a path you cannot attain the goal. All 
students of spirit immortality must first realize simplicity. Teachings 
that are marvelous, artful, and attractive only lead people astray. 
They do not lead to the root. They could never be my teaching.” 



82 


The Teaching 


3. Gradual Progress Toward the Gate of the Tao 

In the Book of Changes, there is the hexagram called “Progres¬ 
sive Advance.” Laozi speaks of the “Marvelous Gate.” Human be¬ 
ings should cultivate inner perfection and realize their original 
natures. They should not expect sudden enlightenment. Rather, 
they progress gradually and practice the techniques in peace. The 
following five are the progressive gateways to the Tao. 

The first is fasting and abstention. 

The second is seclusion. 

The third is visualization and imagination. 

The fourth is sitting in oblivion. 

The fifth is spirit liberation. 

What does fasting and abstention mean? It means 
cleansing the body and emptying the mind. 

What does seclusion mean? It means withdrawing deep 
into the meditation chamber. 

What does visualization and imagination mean? It means 
taming the mind and recovering original nature. 

What does sitting in oblivion mean? It means letting go of 
the personal body and completely forgetting oneself 

What does spirit liberation mean? It means spirit 
pervasion of all existence. 

Practice according to these five and perfect step one, then only 
proceed to step two. Perfect step two, then gradually move on to step 
three. Perfect step three, then approach step four. Perfect step four, 
then finally pass on to step five. Thus you attain spirit immortality! 

4. Fasting and Abstention 

Fasting and abstention not only mean to live on vegetables 
and mushrooms. Cleansing the body is not just bathing to remove 
the dirt. Rather, the method is to regulate the food so that it is 
perfectly balanced, to massage the body so that it glows in health. 

All people are endowed with the energy of the five agents. 
They live on things that consist of the five agents. From the time 
they enter the womb people breathe in and out; blood and essence 
circulate in their bodies. How could one stop eating and yet attain 
long life? 



11. The Path 


83 


Ordinary people do not realize that to abstain from food and 
nourish on pure energy are only temporary measures of the Tao- 
ists. These things do not mean that we completely abstain from all 
grain. We speak of fasting and abstention from food, yes. But we 
refer to the purification of nourishment and the moderation of in¬ 
take. If one is hungry one eats—but never to satiation. Thus we 
establish a balanced diet. 

Don’t eat anything not well cooked! Don’t eat strongly flavored 
dishes! Don’t eat anything rotten or conserved! These are our basic 
abstentions. Massage your skin with your hands so that it becomes 
moist and hot! This drives out the cold energy and makes the body 
radiate with a glow. 

Refrain from long sitting, long standing, long exhaustive labor! 
All these are basic abstentions. They serve to balance and regulate 
the body. If the body is strong, energy is whole. Thus, fasting and 
abstention are the first gateway to the Tao. 

5. Seclusion 

What is meant by seclusion? It has nothing to do with living in 
ornate halls, in cavernous buildings, on double matting and thick 
carpeting. It means sitting with one’s face to the south, sleeping 
with one’s head to the east, complying in everything with the har¬ 
monious rhythm of yin and yang. 

Light and darkness should be in balance. The room should not 
be too high. If it is too high, yang is predominant and there will be 
too much light. The room should not be too low. If it is too low, yin 
is predominant and there will be too much darkness. The reason 
for this precaution is that, when there is too much light, the mate¬ 
rial souls will be harmed. When there is too much darkness, the 
spirit souls will suffer. People’s three spirit souls are yang, their 
seven material souls are yin. Harm them with light and darkness, 
and they will get sick. 

When things are arranged in the proper balanced way, we 
have a chamber of seclusion. Still, don’t forget how various the 
energies of heaven and earth can be. There may be, for example, 
a violent yang that attacks the flesh. Or there may be a lascivi¬ 
ous yin that overpowers the body. Be wary and guard against 
these! 

During the progressive advance of cultivation and nourishment 
there is no proper seclusion unless these instructions are carried 
out. Thus the Master of Heavenly Seclusion says: 



84 


The Teaching 


“The room I live in has windows on all four sides. When wind 
arises I close them; as soon as the wind has died down I open them 
again. In front of my meditation seat a curtain is suspended; be¬ 
hind it a screen has been placed. When it is too light I draw the 
curtain to adjust the brightness inside. When it gets too dark I roll 
the curtain up again to let light in from outside. 

“On the inside I calm my mind, on the outside I calm my eyes. 
Mind and eyes must be both completely at peace. If either light or 
darkness prevails, there are too many thoughts, too many desires. 
How could I ever calm myself inside and out?” Thus, in studying 
the Tao, seclusion marks the second step. 

6. Visualization and Imagination 

Visualization is to produce a vision of one’s spirit. Imagination 
means to create an image of one’s body. How to do this? Close your 
eyes and you can see your own eyes. Collect the mind and you can 
realize your own mind. Mind and eyes should never be separate 
from the body; they must not harm the spirit: this is what visual¬ 
ization and imagination are for. 

Ordinary people, to the end of their days, direct their eyes only 
toward others. Thus their minds wander outside. When the mind is 
concerned only with outer affairs, it also causes the eyes to con¬ 
tinue looking at things outside. Brightly sparkling, their light floats 
around and never reflects back on themselves. How can people not 
become sick from this and end up dying prematurely? 

Therefore, “return to the root means tranquility, and tranquil¬ 
ity means to recover life.” To recover life and perfect one’s inner 
nature is called “the gate of all subtleties.” Thus, with the step of 
visualization and imagination the task of learning the Tao is half 
completed. 

7. Sitting in Oblivion 

Sitting in oblivion is the perfection of visualization and imagina¬ 
tion. It is also the utter oblivion of visualization and imagination. 

To put the Tao into action but not oneself act—isn’t that the 
meaning of sitting? To see something and not act on it—isn’t that 
the meaning of oblivion? 

Why do we speak of not acting? Because the mind remains free 
from agitation. Why do we speak of not seeing? Because the body is 
completely obliterated. 



11. The Path 


85 


Someone asks: “If the mind is unmoving, does it have the Tao 
then?” The Master of Heavenly Seclusion remains silent and does 
not answer. 

Another asks: “If the body is obliterated, does it have the Tao 
then?” The Master of Heavenly Seclusion closes his eyes and does 
not look. 

Then someone awakens to the Tao and, in withdrawing, says: 
“The Tao is really in me. What person is this ‘me’? What person 
actually is this Master of Heavenly Seclusion?” 

Thus, self and other are both forgotten. Nothing is left to shine 
forth. 

8. Spirit Liberation 

Step one, fasting and abstention, is called liberation through 
faith. Without faith, the mind cannot be liberated. 

Step two, seclusion, is called liberation through tranquility. 
Without tranquility, the mind cannot be liberated. 

Step three, visualization and imagination, is called liberation 
through insight. Without insight, the mind cannot be liberated. 

Step four, sitting in oblivion, is called liberation through ab¬ 
sorption. Without absorption, the mind cannot be liberated. 

When the four gates of faith, tranquility, insight, and absorp¬ 
tion have been pervaded by the spirit, then we speak of spirit 
liberation. By “spirit” we mean that which arrives without moving 
and is swift without hurrying. It pervades the rhythm of yin and 
yang and is as old as heaven and earth. 

When the three forces, heaven, earth, and humanity, are com¬ 
bined, changes occur. When the myriad beings are equalized, then 
the Tao and the Virtue are active. When the one original nature of 
all is realized, there is pure suchness. Enter into suchness and 
return to non-action. 

The Master of Heavenly Seclusion says: “I am born with the 
changes; I will die with the changes. In accordance with the myriad 
beings I move; going along with the myriad beings I rest. Pervasion 
comes from the one original nature; perfection comes from the one 
original nature. Through spirit I am liberated from all: life and 
death, movement and rest, pervasion and perfection.” 

Among human beings the liberated are spirit immortals: in 
heaven they are heavenly immortals; on earth they are earth im- 



86 


The Teaching 


mortals; in water they are water immortals. Only when they per¬ 
vade all are they spirit immortals. 

The path to spirit immortality consists of these five progressive 
gateways. They all lead to one goal only. 

12. The Way to Complete Perfection 

Wang Chongyang (1113-1170), originally a military official of 
the Song, founded the school of Complete Perfection (Quanzhen) 
after he had withdrawn from service and lived in total seclusion for 
a decade. He was known as a rather eccentric ascetic and, once he 
decided to leave his meditation hut and spread the revelation he 
had received from Lii Dongbin, soon acquired a large following. He 
had seven major disciples, six men and one woman, who became 
the patriarchs of the sect after him. 

The teaching of Complete Perfection is a mixture of Confucian 
formality, simple asceticism, Buddhist monachism, and Taoist in¬ 
ner alchemy. Due to ample imperial sponsorship, the school contin¬ 
ued to flourish and, by the fourteenth century, had assimilated the 
numerous Taoist schools that had sprung up around the same time. 
It is the leading Taoist school in mainland China today and the 
only surviving form of monastic Taoism. 

The Chongyang lijiao shiwu lun contains its basic principles in 
fifteen short articles. The text is contained in DZ 1233, fasc. 989. 
Earlier translations are found in Yao 1980: 73-85 and Reiter 1985. 
On the history of the school of Complete Perfection, see Yao 1980, 
Tsui 1991. For some of its typical features, see Hawkes 1981. On 
Lii Dongbin, see Section 14 (“Passing the Test”) below. 


Chongyang lijiao shiwu lun (Chongyang’s Fifteen Articles 
on Establishing the Teaching) 

1. Cloistered Residence 

If you leave the family life you must first join a cloister. A 
cloister is a kind of residence. It provides your personal body with a 
foundation. When your personal body has a good foundation, your 
mind can gradually find peace. Then energy and spirit radiate in 
harmony, and you can enter the true Tao. 

When movement and action become necessary, you must not 
overdo things and exhaust yourself, because when you overdo things 
and exhaust yourself, your energy will diminish. On the other hand. 




11. The Way to Complete Perfection 


87 


you can’t remain entirely without movement, either, because not 
moving at all causes obstructions to energy and blood. 

You should, therefore, find a middle way between movement 
and tranquility. Only then can you guard the eternal and be at 
peace with your lot. This is the way of residing in peace. 

2. Wandering Like the Clouds 

There are two different ways of wandering. 

The first is to relish the spectacular scenery of mountains and 
rivers and enjoy the colorful bloom of flowers and trees. Someone 
doing so might frolic around in the variety and glitter of cities big 
and small or savor the towers and pavilions of temples and monas¬ 
teries. He might visit friends and please himself or engage wan¬ 
tonly in the delights of food and fashion. 

Someone who wanders like this, even if he covers a myriad 
miles, will exhaust his body and squander his strength. As he gazes 
all around at the sights of the world, his mind gets confused and 
his energy weakens. Such a one vainly wanders like the clouds. 

The second way of wandering is to pursue inner nature and 
destiny and search for mystery and wonder. One who wanders like 
this climbs into high mountains over dangerous passes and visits 
enlightened teachers without tiring. He crosses distant streams 
with turbulent waters and inquires for the Tao without slackening. 

Then, even a single saying received in the right spirit may 
open up complete understanding. The great realization of life and 
death dawns within and you become a master of Complete Perfec¬ 
tion. As such, you truly wander like the clouds. 

3. The Study of Texts 

The right way to study texts is not to pursue literary quality 
and dazzle your eyes. Rather, extract their inner meaning in true 
harmony with your mind. Abandon the texts when you have ex¬ 
tracted their meaning, their principle. And don’t hesitate to aban¬ 
don this in turn when you have found its deepest ground. Once this 
ground has been grasped, it can be consolidated in the mind. 

Keep it in the mind for a very long time and its essence and 
inner truth will become a natural part of yourself Mind and radi¬ 
ance become vast and overflowing; wisdom and spirit take off in 
leaps and bounds. There is nothing they do not pervade, nothing 
they do not understand. 



88 


The Teaching 


Once at this level, you should further consolidate and nourish 
it. Yet take good care never to be hasty or nervous about the pro¬ 
cess, because there is the danger that you might lose hold over 
inner nature and destiny. 

There are also people who do not penetrate to the deepest 
intention of the texts because they desire only to memorize many 
concepts and become widely read. Such people will chatter in front 
of others, bragging of their outstanding talents. With this they do 
nothing for their practice of cultivation, but on the contrary harm 
their spirit and energy. However many texts they may read, what 
do they truly gain in terms of the Tao? 

Only by attaining the most fundamental inner meaning of the 
texts can you really harbor them in your depth. 

4. The Preparation of Medicines 

Herbs are the finest energy of mountains and streams, the 
essential florescence of grasses and trees. They may be warm, or 
they may be cool; one uses them to supplement or drain energy. 
They may be thick, or they may be thin; one uses them externally 
or from within. 

Studying herbs in their essence allows you to support your 
inner nature and destiny. On the other hand, if you apply herbs 
blindly, you will waste your body and physical constitution. 

All those who study the Tao must penetrate herbal lore. If you 
do not do so, you have no means to support the Tao. Yet in doing so, 
you must not develop attachments, for they will diminish the hid¬ 
den merits of past lives. You will then hanker after material goods 
on the outside and waste your efforts at cultivation within. 

Not only does this lead to grave transgressions and errors in 
this life, but it will also cause retribution in the lives to come. Oh, 
noble disciples of my teaching! Heed this and be very careful! 

5. On Construction 

Reed-thatched huts and grass-thatched cottages are needed to 
protect your body. To sleep in the open air or out in the fields is an 
offense to the sun and the moon. 

On the other extreme, to live under carved beams and lofty 
eaves is what a superior disciple should not do, either. How can 
grand palaces and fancy halls be an appropriate way of living for a 
follower of the Tao? To cut down trees is to sever the precious fluid 



12. The Way to Complete Perfection 


89 


of the earth’s veins, just as to beg for goods and money is to take 
away the life-blood of the people. 

To cultivate only outside merits without pursuing inner prac¬ 
tice is like trying to still one’s hunger by drawing a cake or collect¬ 
ing snow for provisions. One vainly expends much effort and in the 
end gains nothing. 

Disciples of strong determination must search for precious pal¬ 
aces inside their very own body. All vermilion towers outside of the 
body, however unceasingly one continues to erect them, one will 
only see them collapse and crumble. Oh, bright and perceptive 
worthies! Examine yourself with great care! 

6. Companions in the Tao 

People in the Tao join together as companions, because they 
can help each other in sickness and disease. “If you die. I’ll bury 
you; if I die, you’ll bury me,” is their motto. 

Therefore, first of all choose the right person and only then join 
that person as a companion. By no means join someone first and 
then think about him as a person. 

Once you have a companion, don’t develop a strong attachment to 
each other. Any such attachment will create a bondage to your minds. 

At the same time, don’t remain entirely without attachment to 
each other. A lack of attachment will cause a divergence in your 
feelings. You must find a middle way between developing personal 
dependence and remaining entirely unattached. 

There are three kinds of people you should join and three 
kinds you should avoid. Go with those who have an illumined mind, 
deep wisdom, or strong determination. Never team up with those 
who do not clearly penetrate the outer projections of the mind, 
those who lack deep wisdom and are doltish and turbid in inner 
nature, or those who are deficient in determination and simply 
bluster about. 

When you set yourself up among your fellow seekers, always 
act in complete accordance with your mind and will. Don’t just 
follow your emotions, nor rely on people’s outer appearance. Always 
only choose the lofty and illumined. This is best. 

7. Sitting Straight 

“Sitting straight” does not simply mean to sit with the body 
erect and eyes closed. That is superficial sitting. To truly sit you 



90 


The Teaching 


must maintain a mind like Mount Tai, unmovable and unshakable 
at all hours of the day, whether staying, walking, sitting, or lying 
down, in all forms of activity and repose. 

Control and shut off the four gates of the senses—eyes, ears, 
mouth, and nose. Never let the outside world come in! If there is 
even a trace of a thought about activity and repose, this is no 
longer sitting quiet. If you can attain such a mind, although your 
body may remain in the world of dust, your name has already been 
entered in the ranks of the immortals. 

Then there is no need to go far and consult others. Rather, you 
will be worthy and sagely within yourself After one hundred years, 
with merits accomplished, you can cut off the shell and ascend to 
the perfected. Your pellet of cinnabar complete, the spirit wanders 
in the eight outer reaches. 

8. Controlling the Mind 

Let me explain the Tao of the mind. If the mind is always deep 
and tranquil, it does not move at all. It is obscure and abstruse, 
and never sees the myriad beings. It is dark and vague, and never 
knows inside or outside. There is not the slightest trace of thought 
or imagination. This is a concentrated mind. It needs no control. 

On the other hand, if the mind actively develops in the pursuit 
of mental projections, it becomes all topsy-turvy, looking for the 
head and searching the tail. This is the confused mind. You must 
cut out and extirpate it thoroughly. Never let it run wild. It ruins 
and destroys Tao and Virtue. It harms and diminishes inner nature 
and destiny. 

Staying, walking, sitting, and lying down—if the mind is con¬ 
stantly controlled, hearing and seeing, knowing and perceiving will 
only be its sickness and affliction. 

9. Refining Original Inner Nature 

Ordering inner nature is like tuning the lute. If the strings are 
too tight they will break; if the strings are too loose they will not 
resonate. Find the middle way between tightness and looseness, 
and the lute can be tuned. 

It is also like casting a sword. If there is too much steel it will 
snap; if there is too much tin it will bend. Find the harmonious 
mixture of steel and tin, and the sword can be used. 



12. The Way to Complete Perfection 


91 


To tune and refine original inner nature embrace these two 
methods, and it will spontaneously be wondrous and smooth. 

10. Pairing the Five Energies 

The Five Energies gather in the center; the Three Primes gather 
at the top. 

The green dragon puffs red mist; the white tiger exhales black 
smoke. 

The myriad spirits array themselves in rows; the [energy in 
the] hundred arteries flows and rushes. 

The cinnabar dust radiates in brightness; the lead and mer¬ 
cury merge in purity. 

The body is entrusted to the human world; the spirit travels in 
heaven. 

11. Merging Inner Nature and Destiny 

Inner nature is spirit; destiny is energy. 

The relationship of inner nature to destiny is like that of wild 
birds to the wind. They use it to float and soar, rising lightly. 
Saving their strength, they accomplish their flight with ease. 

Thus the Scripture of Hidden Correspondences says, “The way 
birds control their flight is through energy.” 

As disciples who cultivate true realization, you must rely on 
this concept but never allow it to get out to lesser people. Other¬ 
wise , I fear, the spirits will send down censure. 

Inner nature and destiny are the roots of cultivation and prac¬ 
tice. Refine them with caution and care! 

12. The Tag of the Sage 

To enter the Tao of the sage, first strengthen your determination 
for many years. Accumulate merit and unceasingly pursue the right 
practice. Become lofty and illumined and join the fold of the stead¬ 
fast and accomplished—then you can enter the Tao of the sage. 

Your body may then dwell in an ordinary house, but your inner 
nature will fill heaven and earth and the entire universe. The host 
of the sages silently protects and supports you. Immortal lords of 
the Great Ultimate invisibly surround you. Your name is recorded 
in the Purple Palace; you rank among the hierarchy of immortals. 



92 


The Teaching 


Your physical form may still sojourn in this world of dust, but 
your mind already radiates widely beyond all. 

13. Going Beyond the Three Worlds 

The Three Worlds are the World of Desire, the World of Form, 
and the World of Formlessness. 

When the mind forgets conscious deliberation and thoughts, it 
goes beyond the World of Desire. When the mind forgets all the 
states of mental projection, it goes beyond the World of Form. When 
the mind does not manifest even a vision of emptiness, it goes 
beyond the World of Formlessness. 

Leaving the Three Worlds, the pure spirit dwells in the realm 
of immortals and sages. Inner nature resides in the heaven of Jade 
Clarity. 

14. How TO Nourish the Eternal Body 

The body of the law is a representation of the formless. It is 
neither emptiness nor existence, has neither behind nor before. It 
is neither low nor high, neither long nor short. 

Active, there is nothing it does not pervade. Resting, it is dark 
and obscure without a trace. Realize this Tao and you can nourish 
this body. The more you nourish it, the more merits you gain. The 
less you nourish it, the less merits you have. 

Never yearn to turn around and go back! Never hanker after 
the ordinary world! Then you will come and go in true spontaneity. 

15. Leaving the World 

Leaving the world does not mean that the body departs. Rather, 
it refers to the mind. The body is like the lotus root; the mind is 
like the lotus blossom. The root is in the mud, yet the blossom is in 
the open air. 

When you realize the Tao, your body will be in the sphere of 
the ordinary, but your mind will be in the realm of the sages. 
Nowadays, people want to avoid death forever and at the same 
time leave the ordinary world. They are very foolish, indeed, and 
have not even glimpsed the true principle of the Tao. 

Now I have given you these fifteen articles in order to admon¬ 
ish all disciples of strong determination. Deeply take them to heart 
in every detail, so you know them well! 



Part Two 


LONG LIFE 




Chapter Four 


DISCIPLINE 


The path toward the Tao, then, consists of “long life and eter¬ 
nal vision,” as the Daode jing already formulates it, and ultimately 
leads to immortality. 

The long life part aims at the complete physical healing of the 
body, the harmonization and synchronization of all aspects of life 
with the rhythms of nature, and the recognition of the cosmic di¬ 
mensions of one’s own physical existence. It begins with discipline. 
Discipline serves to ensure the proper determination toward the 
Tao. It is the foundation that sets up the basic framework of mind 
and body in which alone the hard work of the path can be accom¬ 
plished. Discipline means commitment. It means surrender to the 
Tao, to the scriptures, to the teaching. 

Discipline appears in several concrete forms—moral upright¬ 
ness, formal procedures, physical restrictions, and examinations. 
The key to successful discipline is the development of a strong will 
toward the Tao and to secure its protection. By submitting to disci¬ 
pline one proves one’s readiness to undergo whatever is necessary 
to walk on the path and find one’s place among the celestials. 

The most fundamental form of discipline is found in the 
precepts and prescriptions, the basic rules that regulate the 
moral conscience and community behavior of Taoist practitioners. 
They are valid equally for lay followers and serious adepts, are in 
fact geared primarily toward the harmonious interaction of a large 
group of people, joined and living together in their will to realize 
the Tao. 

In addition, the commitment of Taoist adepts is expressed in 
their undergoing of certain formal rituals. There are rites of ordi¬ 
nation, of reporting to the gods, rites of prayer, of repentance, rites 
for the dead, for the living, and so on. Taoists believe that sickness 
and all ailments of the body are caused by the interference of 


95 



96 


Discipline 


malevolent demons. They can enter the body only due to the moral 
turpitude and sinful life of the individual in question. This being 
so, precepts and rituals, especially exorcisms and rites of repentence, 
are an essential prerequisite to the attainment of perfect health 
and long life. 

Beyond that, individual practitioners need to have the right 
destiny; they have to be ready for higher attainments in terms of 
their cosmic standing. The concept of destiny, understood in an¬ 
cient China in terms of family inheritance, was soon linked with 
the Buddhist notion of karma and thus became more individual¬ 
ized. For Taoists the necessary qualification is the possession of 
“immortals’ bones.” Only one with the right genes can ever be 
taught. 

Even then, strong determination and a will to pursue the Tao 
are essential. Immortals’ bones only guarantee basic good fortune, 
an auspicious meeting with a god or immortal, an opportunity to 
hear the Tao and receive the scriptures. Beyond that, the real work 
begins—often with a series of tests administered by the teacher to 
see how far the promising candidate will go. Some make it, others 
don’t; some will be partial to higher secrets, others will have to 
stick to the more elementary practices. 

The four selections below highlight these different aspects of dis¬ 
cipline. There is first a list of precepts—^the ten precepts, the twelve 
vows, and a series of 180 practical rules—^from the Chishu yujue (Red 
Writings and Jade Instructions) and the Sanyuan pin (Precepts of the 
Three Primes). Both texts are from the ancient corpus of Lingbao 
scriptures of the late fourth and early fifth century. 

Then there are the “Memorial Reading” and a set of formal 
“Incantations for Protection” used in the Rite of Mud and Ashes. An 
intense and rather ecstatic ritual of repentance, this was developed 
in the Lingbao school and undertaken with much splendor since 
the fifth century. The texts are taken from a Taoist encyclopedia of 
the sixth century. 

Third, there are two short stories about how to be taught: the 
biography of the Goddess of the Great One, teacher of the Highest 
Venerable Lord, from a thirteenth-century collection; and the myth 
of the Master on the River, who reveals a commentary on the 
Daode jing to a Han emperor, from a Dunhuang manuscript. Both 
texts outline in exemplary clarity the conditions one must meet to 
be graced with immortal instruction—and the limits of this 
instruction. 

The tests immortals-to-be have to undergo are the topic of the 
fourth selection. Here, too, two stories have been chosen: the bio- 



13. Precepts and Prescriptions 


97 


graphy of Fei Changfang from the Shenxian zhuan (Biographies of 
Spirit Immortals) of the fourth century; and the account of the 
tests of Lii Dongbin from a similar collection of the thirteenth 
century. In both cases, the unsuspecting possessor of the right bones 
meets a celestial emissary. Soon convinced that his fortune lies 
with the master, he follows him and is tested for his Tao-prowess. 
One succeeds all the way; the other fails. They both find a path just 
right for them and proceed to serve suffering humanity. 


13. Precepts and Prescriptions 

Taoist precepts were first adapted from Buddhism when Tao¬ 
ism became a country-wide communal religion in the fifth century. 
They always come back to the basic five; don’t kill, don’t steal, don’t 
lie, don’t misbehave sexually, and don’t get intoxicated. Together 
with five other rules regarding the proper form and use of speech, 
they constitute the original ten precepts of the Tao. 

To the precepts, a set of vows is commonly added. Patterned on 
the bodhisattva vows of Mahayana Buddhism, Taoist vows equally 
stress the strong determination of the practitioner to attain salva¬ 
tion for himself but only after all beings have been saved first. 
They emphasize the role of the active Taoist as a leader and savior 
of all suffering forms of life, as the guide and helper for all in need. 
They also repeat in a personalized, “I will,” form of language the 
need to obey the teachers and honor the scriptures, to study hard 
and practice without laxity. Taking the precepts and vowing to 
pursue the path is thus the beginning of the long ascent. 

Two texts are selected below, one that contains the ten precepts 
and twelve vows, the other a list of three sets of sixty community 
rules geared to the more advanced spiritual leaders (the first set 
actually has only forty-seven). Both documents are of Lingbao origin. 

The first is the Chishu yujue (Red Writings and Jade Instruc¬ 
tions), known in full as Taishang dongxuan lingbao chishu yujue 
miaojing (Highest and Wondrous Scripture of Numinous Treasure 
in the Mystery Cavern Containing Red Writings and Jade Instruc¬ 
tions). It is contained in DZ 352, fasc. 178 and forms part of the 
original corpus of Lingbao scriptures as compiled by Ge Chaofu. 
The translation covers a few pages from the first scroll (1.2b-4a). 
The precepts have also been translated and discussed in Bokenkamp 
1989. 

The second gives the 180 Lingbao precepts in the Sanyuan pin 
(Precepts of the Three Primes). Here the full title is Taishang 



98 


Discipline 


dongxuan lingbao sanyuan pinjie gongde qingzhong jing (Scripture 
on the Weight of Merit and Virtue As Based on the Precepts of 
the Three Primes Contained in the Mystery Cavern of Highest 
Numinous Treasure). The text is found in DZ 456, fasc. 202; the 
selection translates pages 22a-31a. 

For a preliminary study of Taoist precepts, see Schmidt 1985. 
More detailed analyses are, so far, only available in Japanese, es¬ 
pecially in Kusuyama 1992. On Taoist ordination ranks and proce¬ 
dures, see Benn 1991. 


Chishu yujue (Red Writings and Jade Instructions) 

The Ten Precepts 

1. [2b] Don’t harbor hatred or jealousy in your heart! Don’t give 
rise to dark thieving thoughts! Be reserved in speech and wary 
of transgressions! Keep your thoughts on the Divine Law! 

2. Maintain a kind heart and do not kill! Have pity for and sup¬ 
port all living beings! Be compassionate and loving! Broadly 
reach out to bring universal redemption to all! 

3. Maintain purity and be withdrawing in your social interac¬ 
tions! Be neither lascivious nor thieving, but constantly harbor 
good thoughts! Always take from yourself to aid others! 

4. Don’t set your mind on sex or give rise to passions! Be not 
licentious in your heart but remain pure and behave prudently! 
Make sure your actions are without blemish or stain! 

5. Don’t utter bad words! Don’t use flowery and ornate language! 
Be straightforward within and without! Don’t commit excesses 
of speech! 

6. Don’t take liquor! Moderate your behavior! Regulate and har¬ 
monize your energy and inner nature! Don’t let your spirit be 
diminished! Don’t commit any of the myriad evils! 

7. Don’t be envious if others are better than yourself! Don’t con¬ 
tend for achievement and fame! [3a] Be retiring and modest in 
all things! Put yourself behind to serve the salvation of others! 

8. Don’t criticize or debate the scriptures and teachings! Don’t 
revile or slander the saintly texts! Venerate the Divine Law 



13. Precepts and Prescriptions 


99 


with all your heart! Always act as if you were face to face with 
the gods! 

9. Don’t create disturbance through verbal argumentation! Don’t 
criticize any believers, be they monks, nuns, male or female 
laity, or even heavenly beings! Remember, all censure and hate 
diminishes your spirit and energy! 

10. Be equanimous and of whole heart in all of your actions! Make 
sure that all exchanges between humankind and the gods are 
proper and respectful! 

The Twelve Vows 

1. [3b] I will study the perfected scriptures that set forth the 
Divine Law and open the liberation and salvation of all. I will 
bring forth a strong determination for the Tao. I vow to rise to 
the status of a great sage in my lives to come. 

2. I will constantly practice compassion. I vow that all will learn 
of the Divine Law and that salvation will extend universally, 
without hindrance or distortion. 

3. I will delight in the scriptures and teachings. I will study them 
widely to let my understanding deepen and to make my deter¬ 
mination firm and enlightened. I will liberate and transform 
all those in ignorance and darkness. 

4. I will respectfully receive the instructions of my teacher. I will 
spread the wonderful teachings far and wide so that all living 
beings might enter the gate of the Divine Law and forever 
depart from their paths of blindness. 

5. I will cause my faith to extend to the heights of mystery and 
wonder. I will venerate and honor the teachings and moral 
injunctions. I will recite the scriptures morning and night with¬ 
out being lazy or remiss. 

6. I will not labor for glory and fancy ornaments but break the 
chain of worldly causations. I will maintain a steadfast heart 
and resolved determination, so that all I undertake will be 
within the Divine Law. 

7. I will diligently recite the great scriptures. I vow that all be¬ 
ings shall find the bridge of release and that all future life will 
enjoy good karma. 



100 


Discipline 


8. I will always maintain a mind of friendliness, free from all 
perverseness or falsity. I will remain without envy and ill-will, 
without evil and jealousy. 

9. I will represent the sages in all situations where things are 
given life. I will pass on the teachings of the Numinous Trea¬ 
sure uninterrupted and without lapse. 

10. [4a] I will purify my body and keep the precepts. I will observe 
the fasts and establish merit. Thereby I will lead the myriad 
beings to salvation and complete liberation. 

11. I will read broadly in my studies and deeply penetrate the law 
contained in the scriptures. Thus I will prepare the way for 
heavenly beings to save all. 

12. I will be with an enlightened teacher life after life. I will re¬ 
ceive the teachings and spread them so that innumerable liv¬ 
ing beings may be saved. 


Sanyuan pin (Precepts of the Three Primes) 

[22a] To those who pursue the highest Tao! You must not com¬ 
mit the following sins: 

The sin to disregard the scriptures and precepts, harbor 
doubts or be in two minds about the teaching. 

The sin to despise the sagely writings or criticize the sacred 
scriptures. 

The sin to make light of the teachers or break the solemn oath. 

The sin to slander the elders or disregard the heavenly rules. 

The sin to steal the texts of the scriptures or practice without 
the proper teacher. [22b] 

The sin to study on your own, without a teacher, or transmit 
the teachings without proper authorization. 

The sin to illicitly collect the texts of the scriptures and pass 
them on to your disciples. 

The sin to obtain any scriptures without the formal guidance 
of a teacher. 

The sin to receive the scriptures without proper scriptural 
procedure or transmit them on other than the prescribed 
dates. 

The sin to transmit scriptures to the wrong people. 



13. Precepts and Prescriptions 


101 


The sin to receive instruction from a teacher of the Divine 
Law without having accumulated the necessary merit. 

The sin to transmit the teachings to any disciples without 
having accumulated the necessary merit. 

The sin to transmit the Divine Law in any way that does not 
accord with the tradition of the teachers. 

The sin to transmit the scriptures without properly notifying 
the five divine emperors. 

The sin to receive the scriptures when you don’t have faith or 
think lightly of the Tao. [23a] 

The sin to assume merit and fame for yourself without passing 
through the proper process of the sages. 

The sin to neglect to honor your guides and teachers on the first 
and fifteenth of each month and on the eight seasonal festivals. 
The sin to neglect to observe the fasts. 

The sin to neglect to purify yourself for the fasts. 

The sin to take shortcuts in reciting the scriptures. 

The sin to engage in disputes or fights while traveling overland. 
The sin to anger or distress your teachers and elders. 

To all students of the Tao and all lay followers! You must not 
commit the following sins; 

The sin to pick a fight with a good fellow. 

The sin to speak evil or hypocrisy. 

The sin to criticize your teachers, elders, or anyone else. [23b] 
The sin to intoxicate yourself with wine and spirits. 

The sin to kill living beings or give rise to evil thoughts. 

The sin to harbor greed and passion, pride and sloth. 

The sin to defile the Divine Law and the Tao. 

The sin to curse demons and spirits. 

The sin to kill or harm any living beings. 

The sin to use fancy language or words without sincerity. 

The sin to be lewd and lascivious; don’t defile yourself 
The sin to steal other people’s goods. 

The sin to be jealous of others’ wisdom or envy their abilities. 
[24a] 

The sin to turn your back on the love and mercy of your teacher. 
The sin to cheat your teacher and turn away from the Tao. 

The sin to give celestial writings to the uninitiated. 

The sin to speak ill of the scriptures or the Divine Law. 



102 


Discipline 


The sin to turn from the commands of the scriptures. 

The sin to be disobedient to your seniors. 

The sin to be nasty to your juniors. 

The sin to deceive your fellow students. 

The sin to speak nicely while thinking something bad. 

The sin to gossip about the faults of others. [24b] 

The sin to make light of the three luminaries. 

The sin to despise the spirits and the demons. 

These sixty [sic] precepts are being supervised by the Twelve 
Officials of the Central Administrative Section of the First Office of 
the Department of Heaven; by the Fourteen Officials of the Central 
Administrative Section of the First Office of the Department of 
Earth; and by the Fourteen Officials of the Central Administrative 
Section of the First Office of the Department of Water. 

To all students of the Tao and all lay followers! You must not 
commit the following sins: 

The sin to be jealous of your fellow students. 

The sin to speak flowery words or lies. 

The sin to covet personal profits without ever being satisfied. 
[25a] 

The sin to accumulate money and valuables without ever 
thinking of distributing them. 

The sin to take pleasure in grabbing the valuables of others 
for yourself 

The sin to wish harm and disaster, poverty and homelessness 
on others. 

The sin to possess knives, staffs, or any other weapons. 

The sin to slaughter the six domestic animals or kill any 
living beings. 

The sin to shoot down wild animals or birds in the sky. 

The sin to burn the mountainsides in order to hunt. 

The sin to set traps to catch fish. 

The sin to use eating utensils made from gold or silver. 

The sin to covet lucrative appointments or serve a tyrannical 
government. [25b] 

The sin to destroy material objects for your own advancement. 
The sin to throw food or drink into fresh water. 

The sin to covet rich and delicious flavors, fat and meat. 

The sin to covet eating foods of the five tastes. 

The sin to write in a flowery style to hide your true intentions. 



13. Precepts and Prescriptions 


103 


The sin to assemble large crowds. 

The sin to harbor schemes toward another’s wife or daughter. 
The sin to criticize affairs of state. 

The sin to harbor schemes toward another’s wealth or goods. 
The sin to spoil the nice things of others with coarse objects. 
[26a] 

The sin to concern yourself with the affairs of lords and kings. 
The sin to make false statements about the calendar or the 
movements of the stars. 

The sin to burn down fields or mountain forests. 

The sin to cut down trees or idly pick leaves and plants. 

The sin to wander about with bad people or get too trusting 
with strangers. 

The sin to mix with common folk or pick fights with them. 

The sin to eat all by yourself when among a group, without 
thinking that they might be hungry too. 

The sin to break up another’s wedding with people of the world. 
The sin to engage in entertainments of people of the world. 

The sin to swear allegiance to your fellows on the outside 
while secretly all set to ruin these good men. [26b] 

The sin to speak of your elders or superiors as faulty and bad. 
The sin to expose the secrets or vulgar behavior of others. 

The sin to attack good people or quarrel without end. 

The sin to sneak a look at others’ correspondence or pry into 
their secrets. 

The sin to speak or walk about with a woman alone. 

The sin to share mixed living quarters. 

The sin to share mixed dining halls or exchange clothes with a 
woman. 

The sin to interact with women without goodness. 

The sin to think yourself great and develop pride. 

The sin to take it upon yourself to revenge public injustice. [27a] 
The sin to leave your family. 

The sin to abort children or harm the unborn. 

The sin to get too close to members of other clans. 

The sin to throw poisonous drugs into fresh water and thus 
harm living beings. 

The sin to secretly love any of your juniors. 

The sin to assemble a crowd of people. 

The sin to distribute writings that slander others. 

The sin to presume that only you know how to properly use 
your inner nature. 

The sin to idly set up taboos. 



104 


Discipline 


The sin to kill the livestock of others. [27b] 

The sin to criticize the long and short of teachers and of friends. 
The sin to make light of the teaching and the scriptures or any 
other words of the Law. 

The sin to belittle someone else’s age or sickness. 

The sin to be nasty to beggars. 

The sin to become high and mighty when guiding common 
people. 

The sin to turn your family into a clique. 

The sin to live separate from your parents and siblings. 

These sixty precepts are being supervised by the Twelve Offi¬ 
cials of the Left Administrative Section of the Left Office of the 
Department of Heaven; by the Fourteen Officials of the Left Ad¬ 
ministrative Section of the Left Office of the Department of Earth; 
and by the Fourteen Officials of the Left Administrative Section of 
the Left Office of the Department of Water. 

[28a] To all students of the Tao and all lay followers! You must 
not commit the following sins: 

The sin to get angry and rail at your juniors. 

The sin to get angry and upbraid good people. 

The sin to hinder the living to go beyond death. 

The sin to forget your teacher when in wealth and honor. 

The sin to neglect to recollect the Tao on the ritual days for the 
honor of the heavens. 

The sin to get angry and rage at your teachers and leaders. 

The sin to discuss the faults and evil of others. 

The sin to ridicule the poor and humble. [28b] 

The sin to encourage others to do evil. 

The sin to stop others from doing good. 

The sin to enhance the loss and failures of others. 

The sin to approach or leave anyone impolitely, with your back 
turned toward him. 

The sin to call upon the five sacred mountains and three great 
rivers without holding your ritual tablet. 

The sin to defile the five sacred mountains and three great 
rivers. 

The sin to take away what others value highly. 

The sin to be reckless among common folk or pick fights with 
people of the world. 



13. Precepts and Prescriptions 


105 


The sin to congratulate or condole with people of the world or 
seek pleasure among the common masses. 

The sin to lay claim another’s merit to boost your own virtue. 
[29a] 

The sin to speak about what others eat or drink, like or dislike. 

The sin to be startled and frightened when people are ailing 
or distressed. 

The sin to be startled and frightened when wild animals are 
caught or shot down. 

The sin to be startled and frightened with the old or very 
young. 

The sin to take officials, chiefs, or administrators lightly. 

The sin to discuss the straight or crooked ways of the people 
of the world. 

The sin to idly discuss the rise and fall of the country. 

The sin to distribute alms in a niggardly spirit. 

The sin to go wandering about for pleasure and without 
salvational purpose. 

The sin to climb up high to deceive those below. [29b] 

The sin to capture and imprison wild birds or free animals. 

The sin to rejoice over others’ losses and mistakes. 

The sin to throw thorns into people’s way. 

The sin to worship ghosts and spirits. 

The sin to expose your naked body to the Three Luminaries. 

The sin to curse the wind and the rain. 

The sin to barter or borrow without returning your due. 

The sin to deceive others by splendor and fancy words. 

The sin to be disrespectful to the Three Treasures or irreverent 
toward the Heavenly Venerable. 

The sin to plot against the teachers or family of others. [30a] 

The sin to encourage people to be unfilial toward their parents 
or siblings. 

The sin to proudly claim to be special or call yourself a perfected. 

The sin to believe in other religions, variegated techniques, or 
heterodox views. 

The sin to engage in studying without the proper scriptures 
and teacher or in any way deceive the men of spirit. 

The sin to accumulate superfluous clothing instead of distribut¬ 
ing it to the needy. 

The sin to secretly copy the scriptures and precepts or idly 
disclose them. 

The sin to adorn yourself with fancy dress or luxury objects. 



106 


Discipline 


The sin to ascend to the high seat without your body sparkling 
clean. 

The sin to be filthy or irreverent before your teacher. 

The sin to neglect to offer rites and prayers when your teacher 
is in mourning. [30b] 

The sin to pursue worldly fame and forget all about your 
teacher and family. 

The sin to expect to rise to splendor when your teacher attains 
noble rank. 

The sin to neglect to take care of your teacher when he is sick 
or in dire straights. 

The sin to distance yourself from the distress of others and 
rush to pursue your own pleasure. 

The sin to enter or leave a chamber of the Tao without proper 
formalities. 

The sin to enter a chamber of the Tao to idly chat with people. 

The sin to perform rites or offer prayers without transferring 
merit to the Three Bureaus. 

The sin to wallow in pity for the state of your own family 
without considering the plight of others. 

The sin to resent the Tao or blame your teacher if there is 
bereavement or sickness in your home. 

The sin to claim personal possession of scriptures or techniques 
that you have received from your teacher. 

The sin to pass on the methods of your teacher without proper 
procedures and due covenant. 

The sin to speak the names of the Five Emperors on the eight 
days of seasonal division. 

These sixty precepts are being supervised by the Twelve Offi¬ 
cials of the Right Administrative Section of the Right Office of the 
Department of Heaven; by the Fourteen Officials of the Right Ad¬ 
ministrative Section the Right Office of the Department of Earth; 
and by the Fourteen Officials of the Right Administrative Section 
of the Right Office of the Department of Water. 


14. Protective Measures 

Taoist ritual and talismans were used as protective measures 
against the influence of demons and other evil forces from the begin¬ 
nings of the religion in the second century c.e. Talismans, as the 
immediate representation of celestial script, could ward off evil, un- 



14. Protective Measures 


107 


mask demons, convey control over forces of this world, and provide 
access to the realms of the otherworld. Rituals, notably purifications 
and invocations of the gods for protection, had the same purpose. 

Purifications included not only abstentions from defiling sub¬ 
stances and activities, but also active acts of repentance and contri¬ 
tion. The virtue inherent in oneself had to be brought back to its 
original purity, to a level close to the Tao itself. For that purpose, 
not only had sins and moral failures to be avoided in the future, 
but also those committed in the past had to be made up for. 

The Rite of Mud and Ashes, described below, was such a 
purificatory ritual, developed in the context of the Lingbao school. It 
was basically an elaborate ceremonial punishment, believed to exon¬ 
erate the participants from their own sins and those committed by 
their ancestors. This ritual would ward off calamities threatening 
to strike in this life and the next. It closely imitated the trials 
undergone by criminals condemned by the courts of the world. 

The participants would appear wearing sackcloth, their faces 
smeared with soot. They would chant prayers of sin and repen¬ 
tance, then be guided by the officiant to undergo a ritual punish¬ 
ment. Gradually the rhythm of the chantings would increase, and 
the tension of the punishments would rise, until the crowd, all 
excited, lost control in ecstasy and began to roll wildly in the mud. 
The master of ceremonies then calmed them down again, to move 
on toward the next crescendo. 

The selections below, “The Rite of Mud and Ashes: Memorial” 
and “Incantations to the Protective Gods [of the Five Directions],” 
are taken from the Wushang biyao (Secret Essentials of the Most 
High; 50.1a-2b and 6a-7b). This text is the first Taoist encyclopedia, 
commissioned by Emperor Wu of the Northern Zhou in 574 c.e. For a 
critical summary and analysis of this work, see Lagerwey 1981. 

The Rite of Mud and Ashes is described in Maspero 1981: 381- 
86, where also a short part of the first selection is translated. On 
Taoist ritual in history, see Benn 1991, Schipper 1995 and 1985a. 
For its present form, see Saso 1972, Schipper 1975, Lagerwey 1987. 
The author is indebted to Lowell Skar for his critical reading of the 
translation. 


“The Rite of Mud and Ashes: Memorial,” from Wushang biyao 
50 (Secret Essentials of the Most High) 

[la] The memorial: to be read after the Nocturnal Announce¬ 
ment, conducted as a regular Audience Rite, and addressed to the 
positions and ranks as follows: 



108 


Discipline 


The Highest Great Tao of Non-Ultimate, 

The Highest Lord of the Great Tao, 

The Highest Venerable Lord, 

The Highest Elder, 

The Unsurpassed Venerable of Mystery, 

The Heavenly Venerables of the Numinous Treasure of the Ten 
Directions, 

The Host of Great Sages Who Have Realized the Tao, 

The various Lords and Elders of Utmost Perfection, 

The Great Ritual Masters of the Mysterious Center, 

The Lords Celestial Masters, 

The Highest Chancellors and High Commanders, 

The Four Superintendents and Five Emperors, 

The Assembled Officials of the Three Worlds, 

All the Spirits and Numinous Powers, 

And many others more. 

I am a lowly creature, foul and filthy. 

Most insignificant and most abject. 

May my errors and confusion be turned into blessings! 

May my life and its worth undergo a great transformation! 
May the Three Caverns guide the universe’s course! 

May the Sacred Scriptures descend into the world! 

The Three Masters have opened up salvation. 

Transmitted to us all the wondrous Law, 

In golden writings in jade characters. 

With secret instructions of the spirit immortals. 

On the day when we receive the Law, 

There shall be 

The end to all ignorance and blindness. 

The fulfillment of all flesh and bones. 

[lb] In carrying out the instructions of the scriptures. 

We reverently develop kindness and compassion. 

We support the masters and the elders. 

Unfolding the dark so it may come to light. 

We will open up salvation for all beings 

And rescue them to become residents of heaven. 



14. Protective Measures 


109 


All our deeds will be returned in a report, 

So never dare we be lazy and remiss. 

Reverently here I stand, this humble officiant_, 

To declare on behalf of this person_, 

With words sincere, since he is truly in extremes. 

Genuinely pitiful and in wretched circumstances: 

Reverently led forward by the hand. 

We follow the instructions of the Celestial Master. 

Plastered with soot, as ordered in the rules of Pardon, 

We expose ourselves at the sacred altar. 

Our bodies tied and roped together. 

Hair dishevelled, foreheads smeared with mud. 

We hang our heads, hair dangling in our mouths. 

At the base of the balustrade’s rail. 

Performing the Pure Rite for the Great Pardon 
Of Numinous Treasure’s Lower Prime [festival]. 

We burn fragrant incense, knock our heads to the ground. 

Oh please, oh please, grant mercy! 

Recorded properly on this day and month, on this sacred altar 
in this institution, located in this village, this district, this 
commandery. 

We, this family_, 

Performing the Pure Rite for the Great Pardon, 

Lights lamps to display brightness. 

And illuminate the heavens. 

For three days and three nights. 

Through all six [double-hour] periods. 

We carry out repentance for our Pardon. 

May our millions of forebears and ancestors. 

All our fathers, mothers, uncles, brothers. 

Whether dead already or to die in future, 

Down to ourselves participating here. 

May we all 



no 


Discipline 


Be free from all the evil 
For kalpas still to come! 

[2a] For millions of generations, 

We have committed sins and accumulated burdens. 
Reverently we now trust in the method of this Rite: 

May our family be complete and ordered! 

May we be bathed and cleansed to purity! 

Thus we present this announcement for the merciful 
hearing of 

The Highest Three Venerables, 

The Utmost Perfected of the Ten Directions, 

The Great Ritual Masters of the Mysterious Center: 

Oh, extend down your spirit, shine forth your brightness 
And take cognizance of these words! 

We beg you, oh, issue an edict to 

The Host of Officials of the Numinous Treasure, 

The Powerful Divinities Attending the Scriptures, 

The Assembled Officials of the Three Worlds, 

And also, on this plane. 

The Perfected Officers of the Earth and Land. 

Order them all 

To fuse together and be single-minded. 

To combine their strength 

And guard and protect this person and this family. 
Whether big or small. 

[Order them] 

To come and sweep clean the sanctuary for this fast. 

Our halls and residences, inside and out! 

To kill off all demons and approaching robbers. 

Subdue all the demons of the four directions! 

To come and make 

Our minds sincere, our spirit settled. 

Our thoughts and ideas penetrating and aware— 

As heaven is pure and the earth is vibrant. 



14. Protective Measures 


111 



Fig. 9. Protective Talismans. Source: Shangqing lingbao dafa. 

Thus we submit this memorial to highest hearing. 

May much merit be generated by this Rite! 

May there never be any hindrance or obstruction! 

This person, 

I have repeatedly made unworthy efforts to approach the Great 
Law, 

Have worn [the talismans of] Utmost Perfection on my belt. 
Still, 









112 


Discipline 


I am bodily bound to reside among the Five Turbidities, 

In the midst of dust and filth. 

My three passageways [of cosmic energy] have not been opened; 
My six emotions are running wild and keep getting stronger. 
Thus I have now put my trust in the precepts and prohibitions, 
[2b] So I may gain more circumspection of myself 

I now rely on the Great Law of this Rite, 

With its clear precepts and stern regulations. 

To cause the host of officials and the lords over humanity 
To all obey the order of the Law: 

Illuminate my days, shine always forth for me! 

As the Law wills, so I have practiced the Tao. 

This I announce to merciful hearing. 


“Divine Incantations to the Protective Gods [of the Five 
Directions],” from Wushang hiyao 50 (Secret Essentials of 
the Most High) 

[6a] Oh, Great God of the East! 

Bright Star of the Ninefold Energy of Azure Heaven! 

You brilliantly illumine the Eastern Regions, 

Penetratingly shine through the Nine Gates, [6b] 

In your revolutions, glittering with the brightness of Pure Yang! 

Oh, come and cleanse out all filth, do away with all evil vapors! 
Open the light for your divine lads 
To come and protect me and my house! 

Restrain the demons and tie up all nasty specters! 

As I rise to face the imperial lords above! 

May I reverently follow the rightful Tao, 

[As set forth in] the red writings and jade documents. 

The talismans and instructions of the nine high heavens! 

May I hitch up the dragons and get ready to rise. 

Rise up to the peaceful abode of Heaven, 

And soon be a flying immortal! 

Oh, Fiery Star of the South! 

Floating Brilliance of the Threefold Energy of Cinnabar Heaven! 



14. Protective Measures 


113 


In your revolutions, you shine forth and illumine all with 
Highest Yang! 

Above you are, the power of Red Essence! 

Oh, open the light for your divine lads, 

Marshall your host of fiery soldiers. 

To come and protect my three palaces within! 

Behead all obnoxious powers and tie up all nasty specters. 
Cut the King of Illusion into little pieces 
And all that obeys the Dark Lord of the North. 

May all the winds and fires in the eight directions 
Blow and shine together, blending in a blaze! 

How dare anyone not obey 

The rightful Tao in its progression? 

May I enjoy the highest merit. 

Be preserved by Heaven forever and ever. 

Through a million kalpas without end! 

Oh, Great Whiteness of the West! 

Floating Essence of the Sevenfold Energy of the Heavens! 
Your radiance shines forth through the Golden Gateway, 
Penetrates with brightness even the deepest dark— 

The Pure Star in your midst. 

Known as the Emperor of all Numen. 

Oh, guard my spirits and secure my house. 

Protect my body from all harm! [7a] 

Oh, destroy the source of all obnoxious powers! 

Let the Way of the King be upright and enlightened. 

And all the halls and residences clear and dignified! 

May the Three Luminaries join their radiance 

And the Tao harmonize with the spontaneous flow of all! 

May I fly up to the Purple Gardens 

With the talismans and instructions of Numinous Treasure! 

May my goodwill spread over the myriad living beings! 

May my merit aid them all— 

And Heaven and Earth be greatly now at peace! 



Fig. 10. An Armed Protector God. Source: Shangqing 
lingbao dafa. 








14. Protective Measures 


115 


Oh, Thunderous Star of the North! 

Active Power of the Fivefold Energy of Dark Heaven! 

Your splendid brilliance reaches even into Great Abstrusity! 
Oh, Venerable God of Black Numen! 

Flying darkness in feathery garb! 

Oh, come and protect all my five gateways. 

Assemble the good essence and apprehend the bad! 

Humbly I dare put forward this request: 

Expel and scatter, destroy and behead [all evils]. 

As the jade talismans command! 

Oh, Spiritual Perfected of Eightfold Majesty! 

Seal off my gates of viciousness and all hindering obstructions. 
Let me be open to the brightness of the Tao! 

Shine and sparkle through my body 

Like the Three Luminaries shining forth together! 

May I steer the empty air and stride upon the winds. 

Lift up my body into the flight of the immortals! 

Oh, Protector Star of the Center! 

Mysterious Perfected and Powerful Ruler 
Of the Unified Energy of the Yellow Middle! 

You spread brilliance and flowing brightness 
Through all the Nine Heavens. 

Oh, open the light for your divine lads. 

Twelve in number. 

For your primordial energy, clear essence of yang. 

And let it float aloft in wafts of vermilion mist! [7b] 

Oh, let your light pervade my residence. 

Reach as far as into my very own body! 

Drive out and destroy the hundred obnoxious forces. 

Kill all the demons, however many millions! 

May this divine incantation to the Mountain of the Center 
Penetrate to Heaven and give me protection! 

May the five sacred animals be securely on guard 
To let me fly up and ascend to the immortals! 



116 


Discipline 


15. How to Be Taught 

To be selected as one worthy to undergo the personal and indi¬ 
vidual training process of the Tao hinges on a meeting with a god 
or immortal. Even then, one has to prove one’s worth and undergo 
tests. In no case must one just ask for the Tao and expect it to be 
given without a murmur. 

The Goddess of the Great One (Taiyi yuanjun) is the teaching 
aspect of Laozi’s mother, of the Mother of the Tao. Originally cre¬ 
ated from the primordial energies of the Tao itself, she is one with 
Laozi in the Tao and yet a different and independent deity. The 
Mother of the Tao, as described by Du Guangting of the tenth 
century, appears in four distinct aspects: as Jade Maiden of Mys¬ 
tery and Wonder she is the virginal cumulation of the Tao before 
she brings forth the Venerable Lord; as Mother Li she is the mother 
of Laozi, the Tao incarnate; as Goddess of the Great One she teaches 
her son the essentials of the Tao; as Great Queen of Former Heaven 
she resides in the higher reaches above. 

Laozi, when confronted with the Goddess, is a helpless seeker 
for immortality, a representative of humanity in the face of the 
divine powers of the Tao. The same position is occupied by Emperor 
Wen of the Han who requests explanations of the Tao from the 
Master on the River (Heshang gong). 

A legendary figure, whose story began to circulate around the 
third century, the Master on the River is associated with a com¬ 
mentary to the Daode jing. This influential document has roots as 
far back as the Han dynasty but in its present form goes back to an 
edition of the fifth century. The story how the Master transmitted 
his commentary is an instructive example of how the Tao can and 
should be taught. 

The first selection on the Goddess of the Great One is taken 
from the Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian houji (Comprehensive Mir¬ 
ror Through the Ages of Perfected Immortals and Those Who Em¬ 
body the Tao, Supplementary Collection), found in DZ 298, fasc. 
150 (1.8b-9a). This text is a huge and justly famous collection of 
immortals’ biographies compiled by Zhao Daoyi around the year 
1300. The “Supplementary Collection” contains hagiographies of 
goddesses and lady immortals. 

The second text on the Master on the River comes from the 
Laozi daode jing xujue (Introductory Explanations to Laozi’s Daode 
jing). This text, which has survived in Dunhuang, is a collection of 
different passages all relevant to the transmission of the Daode 



15. How to Be Taught 


117 


jing and dated to between the second and fifth centuries. The 
Heshang gong story goes back to the fourth. The Dunhuang manu¬ 
script number is S. 75 or S. 2370. For a convenient edition, see 
Ofuchi 1979a: 509. 

On the Goddess, see Kohn 1989c. For more on the Master, see 
Chan 1991. 


“Taiyi yuanjun” (The Goddess of the Great One), from Lishi 
zhenxian tidao tongjian houji (Comprehensive Mirror 
Through the Ages of Perfected Immortals and Those Who 
Embody the Tao, Supplementary Collection) 

The Venerable Lord wandered far off to mountains and through 
grasslands. He searched for the true scriptures that explain how to 
purify the spirit [meditation] and revert the cinnabar [alchemy]. 
When he had almost passed Mount Lao, the Goddess of the Great 
One appeared to him riding a five-colored unicorn and waited upon 
by a host of divine attendants. 

The Venerable Lord advanced to her and asked about the Tao. 

The Goddess said, “The essentials of the Tao are reverted cin¬ 
nabar and the golden fluid.” Thereupon she imparted the secret 
formulas to him. 

In the following year they met again on Mount Li. But at this 
time the Goddess of the Great One declined to reveal any further 
details of the divine cinnabar method. 

“I am chief of all the immortals,” she said, “queen of the 
wondrous Tao. The secret arts, mysterious and numinous, all par¬ 
take in the original mystery. How could I disgrace myself by reveal¬ 
ing them?” 

“Among the people of this world,” the Venerable Lord coun¬ 
tered, “there is not a single one who really knows about death. All 
human beings beat their breasts and cry bloody tears. To see their 
misery stirs my compassion; I wish to give them divine medicine. 
Don’t you think it should be possible that all people live long?” 

“It is not possible,” the Goddess replied with decision. “To live 
in the Tao is very difficult; one must have developed great wisdom 
to do so. One must become a pious, obedient, and truly sincere 
person. Heaven brings forth the myriad beings with good and bad 
traits. The good traits must be multiplied, the bad traits eradi¬ 
cated. It is not sufficient just to give people some medicine and 
make them all live long. But you already know these things; you 
should be careful not to give away the secrets.” 



118 


Discipline 


The Venerable Lord thereupon practiced the Tao of spirit im¬ 
mortality himself. He wanted to hand down its methods to encour¬ 
age future generations in their immortal pursuits. Thus he 
visualized the perfected, guarded the One, refined the cinnabar, 
and nourished his energy. Afterwards he was able to hang freely in 
mid-air and walk on empty space. He could easily leave being and 
enter nonbeing, following wherever his intention took him. Ordi¬ 
nary mortals can never fathom his powers. 

One day he strode on a white deer, rode around the cypress in 
the garden, and ascended to heaven. 


“Heshang gong” (The Master On the River), from Laozi daode 
jing xujue (Introductory Explanations to Laozi’s Daode jing) 

Nobody knows the proper name of Heshang gong, the Master 
on the River. Under Emperor Wen of the Han, he set up his thatched 
hut near the river and spent his time reading the Scripture of the 
Tao and the Virtue. 

Since Emperor Wen loved the words of Laozi, he ordered all 
the ministers, nobles, and vassals of his court to recite them. How¬ 
ever, there were a few sentences he did not quite understand. No 
one in the empire could explain these to him. 

When he therefore heard from one of his courtiers that the 
Master on the River also venerated the text, he sent a messenger 
to him with an imperial summons to come to court and explain the 
passage in question. 

Heshang gong, however, said: “The Tao is venerable. Virtue is 
noble. I am afraid I cannot answer questions brought to me from 
afar.” 

The emperor therefore strode on his horse and paid him a 
visit. 

“In all under heaven,” he said, “there is no place that does not 
belong to me as the ruler. Among all the people living in the world, 
none is not my subject. There are four great halls in my palace, and 
I live in the greatest. You may have the Tao, but you do not have 
the people. You cannot make others obey your orders—why do you 
behave as if you could? I warn you, I can make people rich and 
honored or poor and despised.” 

All of a sudden, the Master on the River clapped his hands and 
stood up from his seat. Imperceptibly he rose up into the air, light 
as a cloud, rising from the ground more than a thousand feet. He 
continued to ascend to the mysterious emptiness of the sky. 



16. Passing the Test 


119 


After a long time, he looked down and said, “Above, I do not 
reach heaven, in the middle I do not belong to humanity, and below 
I do not live on the earth. Whatever people you may rule. Your 
Majesty would hardly be able to make me rich and honored or poor 
and despised.” 

Then the emperor understood. He realized that the Master 
was a spirit being. Sinking to the ground, he bowed deeply and 
expressed his apologies. 

“Without virtue I am and utterly ashamed of my former con¬ 
duct. My abilities amount to nothing. My grief is unbearable in¬ 
deed. I may be involved in regulating the affairs of the world, yet in 
my heart I venerate the Tao and the Virtue. But they are described 
in obscure terms. There are a few places I do not understand prop¬ 
erly. Therefore I dare to beg for your gentle kindness, oh Lord of 
the Tao, to explain them to me.” 

Upon these words, the Master on the River came down again, 
like the radiance of the sun penetrating the dusk, and handed the 
emperor a manuscript of the Daode jing. 

“If you study this with care,” he explained graciously, “all your 
questions will be naturally solved. Since I wrote this commentary, 
more than 7,000 years have passed, but I have only given it to 
three people so far. You are the fourth. Don’t show it to anyone who 
isn’t ready for it!” 

Emperor Wen knelt humbly to receive the text. As soon as he had 
finished speaking, the Master vanished and was nowhere to be seen. 

Note: It seems to me that Emperor Wen loved Laozi and the 
Great Tao very much. But none of the ordinary people around him 
could fully understand its meaning. Yet the emperor meditated on 
its far-out notions and venerated the Highest Lord. Therefore the 
Lord of the Tao sent down a divine messenger to teach him in 
particular. The messenger was to return promptly. 

Then, however, he found that the emperor’s mind was not yet 
full of pure faith. So he showed him divine transformations and 
made him understand the Tao properly. He intended for the em¬ 
peror to perfect his Tao and find his original inner nature. People 
later called this messenger the Master on the River. 


16. Passing the Test 

Two classical stories, well known equally in Taoism and Chi¬ 
nese folklore, illustrate the need not only to profess to a sense of 



120 


Discipline 


dedication and strong determination for the Tao but also to prove 
it. They each tell of a series of tests administered by immortals, 
apparently met accidentally, who guide potential candidates along 
the path. In one case, the final test is failed due to disgust, and the 
aspirant has to be content with the position of a demon-killer on 
earth. In the other, the outcome is successful and the newly devel¬ 
oping immortal becomes a major savior of humankind. 

Both figures introduced below, the Gourd Master (Hugong) and 
Cavernguest Lii (Lii Dongbin) are classical personages. The Gourd 
Master, who also inspired a key figure in van Gulik’s mystery The 
Emperor’s Pearls, is an immortal exiled temporarily from Heaven 
who makes his home inside a gourd. A microcosm, this little con¬ 
tainer sports all the luxuries and delights of a full universe, with 
celestial palaces and a host of divine attendants. 

The Gourd Master uses his immortal powers to dispense medi¬ 
cine to the common people and further the attainments of more 
gifted ones, like Fei Changfang. When literally spiriting his dis¬ 
ciple away, they leave a bamboo staff in his place which appears to 
be his corpse. This process is known as “deliverance from the corpse” 
and used commonly by immortals who are ready to ascend to heaven 
but not yet able to vanish without a trace, a much higher form of 
ascension. Later in the story, another bamboo staff serves as a 
means of transportation—another indication of the powers immor¬ 
tals have over the animate and inanimate universe. 

Cavernguest Lii can easily be described as the most important 
immortal since the tenth century. To the present day, he continues 
to appear in planchette sessions of Complete Perfection groups in 
Hongkong. He is venerated wherever Chinese freely practice their 
religion. For centuries he has aided suffering humanity, revealing 
large numbers of techniques and recipes, ranging from the rules of 
Complete Perfection over methods of Taiji quan to new cough 
medicines. 

Traditionally believed to have been a poet of the late Tang 
(ninth century) by the name of Lii Yan, the Cavernguest can be 
traced historically—with considerable difficulty—to stories about a 
wandering Taoist, happily drinking, loving, and writing poems along 
the waterways of central-southern China. Those waterways were 
the main lines of commerce in the tenth to eleventh centuries, and 
the stories seem to be linked with forms of advertising and a boost 
in business and enterprise at the time. 

Later, in the thirteenth century, with the rise of popular the¬ 
ater, Lii Dongbin became a dramatic figure and soon developed into 



16. Passing the Test 


121 


the central character of a group of eight. Seven men and one woman, 
these Eight Immortals were—with the exception of Zhongli Quan, 
who originally initiated Lii—all converted by him, aided in their 
efforts to attain the Tao. The eight, ubiquitous in all Chinese com¬ 
munities to the present day, stand for the happy-go-lucky vision of 
a life that flows effortlessly along with the course of nature. They 
are delightful company, drinking, singing, having fun. Their pic¬ 
tures are signs of good fortune and blessing, their worship—usu¬ 
ally associated with institutions of Complete Perfection—geared 
toward raising the level of happiness all around. 

Among the two texts selected below, the account of the Gourd 
Master is taken from Shenxian zhuan (Biographies of Spirit Immor¬ 
tals), chap. 5. This collection, although reedited variously later, origi¬ 
nally goes back to Ge Hong of the early fourth century. But the 
Gourd Master is known not only from this. Translations of different 
versions of his story are contained in Giles 1948; 79-81, after the 
Yuan dynasty Zengxiang liexian zhuan (Illustrated Immortals’ Biog¬ 
raphies) as well as in Ngo 1976: 128-34 and DeWoskin 1983: 77- 81 
(after the Hou Hanshu; Dynastic History of the Later Han Dynasty). 

Lii Dongbin’s meeting with the Tao and subsequent tests are 
told in the Zengxiang liexian zhuan (2.12b-13b). The same version 
has also been translated in Yetts 1916: 790-97. For a historical 
study of this Taoist immortal, see Baldrian 1986. On his role in 
Quanzhen Taoism today, see Tsui 1991. For material on the Eight 
Immortals, see Ling 1918, Yang 1958, Yetts 1916, 1922. For a dis¬ 
cussion of “deliverance from the corpse,” see Robinet 1979a. On the 
symbolism of the immortals, especially the microcosm of the gourd 
and the grotto, see Stein 1990. 


“Hugong” (The Gourd Master), from Shenxian zhuan 
(Biographies of Spirit Immortals) 

Nobody knows the real name of the Gourd Master, but several 
talismans and sacred instructions prevalent today have been re¬ 
vealed through him. Among them are some that summon celestial 
armies, others that call on demons and spirits, as well as some that 
cure diseases. All in all, the Gourd Master delivered over twenty 
scrolls of texts, collectively known as the “Gourd Master Talismans.” 

Once there was a certain Fei Changfang, a native of Runan, 
who served as a guard in the marketplace. One day he saw the 
Gourd Master arrive from the distance, enter the market and set 
up a stall to sell medicine. Nobody recognized him. The drugs he 



122 


Discipline 


sold were all equally priced, yet they cured all kinds of different 
diseases with the same efficacy. 

As the Master instructed his customers: “Take this medicine, 
then each such-and-such, and within a few days you will be cured. 
Success is guaranteed!” 

With this business, the Gourd Master made several ten thou¬ 
sand cash every day, of which he only kept thirty to fifty for his 
own use. The remainder he distributed to the poor around the 
marketplace, to all those starving and cold. 

The Master always had a large gourd hanging in front of his 
medicine stall. At sunset, when the market closed, he would 
promptly leap into the gourd. 

No one in the marketplace was able to see this, but Changfang, 
from his observation tower, could. Thus he knew that the Gourd 
Master was a very unusual person. He therefore resolved to serve 
him. Day in, day out, he swept the ground before the Master’s stall 
and brought him food. The Master graciously accepted this service 
and did not reject it. 

This went on for quite some time, but Changfang never went 
lax in his efforts even for a moment, nor did he dare to ask for any 
kind of reward. The Gourd Master knew thus that Changfang had 
genuine faith. 

One day he told him, “Come back to me at sunset when every¬ 
body has left.” 

Changfang did as he was told and presented himself 

“When you see me jump into the gourd,” the Master instructed 
him, “just follow my example and jump yourself You will get in 
easily.” 

Changfang obeyed and indeed entered the gourd before he even 
noticed that anything was moving. Once inside, it was no longer a 
mere gourd. Everywhere he looked there were immortals’ palaces, 
worlds upon worlds, with marvelous towers, splendid double gates, 
and highways between pavilions. A host of servants and attendants 
stood at attention. 

“I am an immortal,” the Gourd Master told his guest. “In the 
old days I used to have a position in the celestial administration. 
But once I failed to properly support a public affair and was pun¬ 
ished by banishment to the world of mortals. Now, you have what 
it takes. Therefore you were able to see me.” 

Changfang knelt and knocked his head. “People of flesh and 
blood,” he declared, “don’t know how many sins they accumulate, 
how often they reject prosperity and happiness. Their erroneous 
ways should be pitied. They certainly act as if they were entering 



16. Passing the Test 


123 



Fig. 11. The Gourd Master and Fei Changfang. Source: Zengxiang 
liexian zhuan. 


open coffins and do nothing but continually disperse their energies. 
They behave as if they could bring their rotten bones back to life or 
arise from putrefaction. They only fear the superficial stench and 
the corruption, never obeying the driving force at the depth. Pitiful 
indeed—what the world calls prosperity and happiness!” 








124 


Discipline 


“You are really quite outstanding,” the Gourd Master agreed, 
“but keep quiet about your observations.” 

On a later occasion, the Gourd Master visited Changfang on 
his observation tower. “I have brought a little wine,” he said, “let us 
drink together!” 

The wine was downstairs, so Changfang sent a man down to 
pick it up, but he could not budge it. Changfang then sent a group 
of men down to hoist it up, but they could not move it either. He 
told the Master, who smiled and went down himself He returned 
carrying the wine with a single finger. The container appeared to 
be slightly more than a cup, but the two men drank from it all day 
and could not exhaust its contents. 

“I will soon be leaving,” the Gourd Master announced to 
Changfang. “Would you like to come with me?” 

“I do indeed have the strong wish to join you. There is no 
question about that. But I would prefer my relatives not to know 
that I have gone off. Is there anything we can do about this?” 

“But that’s easy,” the Master said and handed a fresh stick of 
bamboo to his follower. 

“Take this stick,” he explained, “and go back home. Then com¬ 
plain of some sickness and place this stick in your bed. Come away 
in secret and watch what happens.” 

Changfang did as he was told. After he had left, his relatives 
believed that he had died, seeing as they did his corpse in the bed. 
They wailed and sobbed, and duly buried the body. 

But Changfang was following the Gourd Master and soon lost 
all orientation of where he was. 

The Master then put Changfang to the test. He left him in the 
midst of a pack of tigers. Curling their lips, they opened their 
mouths and revealed their sharp teeth, getting all ready to eat 
him. But Changfang showed not a trace of fear. 

The next day he found himself in a stone cavern with a huge 
boulder, several tens of feet in size, above his head. It was sus¬ 
pended by nothing more than a piece of straw rope. A swarm of 
snakes crawled over each other for a chance to gnaw the rope in 
half, but Changfang did not so much as flinch. 

The Gourd Master returned and patted him. “You can indeed 
be taught!” he said with relish. 

But he tested him a third time by having him eat a pile of 
feces, foul with decay and full of worms several inches long. The 
stench and filth were awfully loathsome, and Changfang felt dis¬ 
gust at this. 



16. Passing the Test 


125 


“You will not attain the Tao of the immortals,” the Master 
dismissed him, apologetic and with a deep sigh. “But I can grant 
you the powers of a demon master on earth, and you will reach a 
life-span of several hundred years.” 

He proceeded to hand him a sealed talisman in one scroll. 
“Carry this on your belt,” he explained, “and you will be the master 
of all demons and spirits. Ordering them about, you can cure dis¬ 
eases and avert disasters.” 

Changfang was sad about leaving. Worse, he had no idea how 
to get back home. The Gourd Master thereupon gave him another 
bamboo staff and said, “Just stride on this and you will be back in 
no time.” 

Changfang strode on the staff and bade him farewell. In an¬ 
other instant, feeling as if he were awakening from a dream, he 
arrived back at his old home. His relatives saw him and thought he 
was a ghost. Only when he told his story and after they had un¬ 
earthed his coffin did they believe him. Just as he had said, the 
coffin contained only a stick of bamboo. 

The staff on which Changfang had ridden home he tossed into 
the Gebei Lake. He watched it hit the water and found that it was 
in fact a green dragon. 

When he first came home, he thought he had been away only 
for a day or two, but according to his relatives, already a year had 
passed since his apparent death. 

From that time on, Changfang used his talisman to control 
demons and cure all manner of illnesses. Often when he was sit¬ 
ting and chatting with a group of people, he suddenly showed signs 
of great rage. Asked about this, he said, “I was just reprimanding 
some demons.” 

At that time in Runan there was a malevolent demon who had 
been in the commandery for several years. Whenever he arrived in 
town, he would ride in like the grand protector, visit the district 
office, and pound the alarm drum. After circulating around the 
tribunal, inside and out, he would leave again. People felt greatly 
afflicted by this demon. 

Once when Changfang visited the magistrate’s office, the de¬ 
mon also arrived at the gates. The commandery forces immediately 
fled to safety inside the walls, so Changfang was left alone in the 
courtyard to face the monster. Recognizing him, the demon was so 
terrified that he did not dare to advance. 

Raising his voice in command, Changfang called out to him: 
“What a handy catch! Come right here, you old demon!” 



126 


Discipline 


The monster stepped down from his carriage, knelt in the court¬ 
yard, and knocked his head to the ground. 

“Please pardon my offense,” he pleaded in a thin voice. 

“You dead-beat old monster, you!” Changfang scorned him. “No 
sense of charity or mercy! For no good reason whatsoever you pur¬ 
sue your evil ways! And now you have offended our magistrate! You 
know very well that is punishable by death, no? Now, get back to 
your true shape, and be quick about it!” 

The demon instantaneously turned into an old tortoise, big as 
a wagon wheel, with a neck stretching some ten feet. Changfang 
then ordered him back into human form and gave him a ritual 
tablet with a talisman to take to the ruler of the Gebei Lake. 

The monster knocked his head and wept bitterly. Taking the 
tablet, he left. Changfang invited the frightened people to watch 
the demon’s progress. They saw how he stuck the tablet into the 
ground on the lakeshore, wrapped his neck around it, and died. 

On a later occasion, Changfang visited the coast of the Eastern 
Sea. There he found that the area was suffering from a three-year 
drought. Seeing people desperately pleading for rain, he told them, 
“The Dragon King of the Eastern Sea once seduced the wife of his 
colleague in the Gebei Lake. I punished him for it. This was three 
years ago and I did not think further of it. Tossing the affair aside, 
I forgot all about it. But this is why you’ve been having such a long 
spell of drought. I’ll pardon him immediately and see that he makes 
rain for you without any further delay.” 

Before long it rained long and hard. 

Changfang also possessed various supernatural powers. He 
could shrink the arteries of the earth up to one thousand miles and 
thus make distant places appear in front of one’s eyes. Released 
from his grip, the earth would stretch back to its old shape as if 
nothing had happened. 


“Lii Dongbin” (Cavernguest Lii), from Zengxian liexian zhuan 
(Illustrated Immortals’ Biographies) 

[12b] Lii Yan, also known as Cavernguest Lii [Dongbin], lived 
under the Tang dynasty and was a native of Yongle District in 
Puzhou. He was later called the Master of Pure Yang [Chunyang]. 

When his mother gave birth to him, an unearthly perfume 
pervaded the house and the sounds of celestial music wafted from 
the sky. A white crane flew down from heaven, appeared between 
the curtains of her bed, and vanished again. 



16. Passing the Test 


127 


Even as a newly born infant, Lii’s body had a golden shimmer 
and his flesh a radiant freshness. The crown of his head formed a 
high dome resembling a crane’s, while his back was arched like 
that of a tortoise. His eyes were as brilliant as those of a phoenix, 
and his eyebrows extended on either side to meet the hair on the 
temples. 

While still a child, he was very quick at learning, being able to 
memorize ten thousand words a day. His language was fluent and 
couched in classical terms. Eight feet two inches in height, he re¬ 
sembled the immortal Zhang Zifang. At the age of twenty, he had 
not yet taken a wife. 

The Patriarch Ma had seen him at the beginning of his life, 
when he was still in swaddling clothes, and exclaimed; “This child’s 
bones are of no ordinary mortal. Extraordinary in character, he will 
hold aloof from worldly affairs. Whatever hovel he happens upon 
he will make his home. Whenever he sees a goblet of wine he will 
partake of it. Mark well my words!” 

Later on Dongbin wandered to Mount Lu. There he met a Tao¬ 
ist known as Master Firedragon [Huolong], who instructed him in 
acquiring supernatural invisibility by the magic sword method. 

During the reign period Accomplished Prosperity [841-46], he 
went up twice for the imperial degree, but failed. At that time he 
was sixty-four years of age. 

Once he wandered into a tavern in Chang’an to see a Taoist 
priest, dressed in a gray cap and white gown, spontaneously scribble 
a poem on the wall. It ran. 

Sit or lie—I always grasp a pot of wine. 

No need to tell my eyes to see the starry zone. 

Vast like heaven and like earth, I never have a name. 

Among so many mortals. I’m scattered and alone. 

Impressed and attracted by the Taoist’s strange appearance 
and unusual old age, as well as by the grace and naturalness of his 
verse, Dongbin bowed to him and inquired his name. 

“I am Master Cloudchamber [Zhongli Quan],” he answered. 
“My home is the Crane Ridge in the Zhongnan Mountains. Would 
you like to join me in my wanderings?” 

Dongbin hesitated to agree to this proposal, so Master 
Cloudchamber took him to an inn. While he attended to the prepa¬ 
ration of a simple meal, Dongbin reclined on a pillow. Soon he 
became oblivious of his surroundings and fell asleep. 



Fig. 12. Lti Dongbin in His Celestial Palace. Source: Zengxiang liexian 
zhuan. 











16. Passing the Test 


129 


He had a dream. He dreamt that he went up to the capital as a 
candidate of the imperial examination and passed it at the top of 
the list. Starting his career as a junior secretary to one of the 
Boards, he rapidly rose in rank to positions at the Censorate and 
the Hanlin Academy. Eventually he became a Privy Councillor af¬ 
ter he had occupied, in the course of his unbroken success, all the 
most sought-after and important official posts. 

Twice he was married, he further dreamt, and both wives be¬ 
longed to families of wealth and position. Children were born to 
him. His sons soon took themselves wives, and his daughters left 
the paternal roof for their husbands’ homes. All these events hap¬ 
pened before he even reached the age of forty. 

Next he found himself Prime Minister for a period of ten years, 
wielding immense power. This corrupted him. Then suddenly, with¬ 
out warning, he was accused of a grave crime. His home and all his 
possessions were confiscated, his wife and children separated. He 
himself, a solitary outcast, was wandering toward his place of ban¬ 
ishment beyond the mountains. He found his horse brought to a 
standstill in a snowstorm and was no longer able to continue the 
journey. 

At this juncture in his dream Dongbin woke with a heavy sigh. 
Lo and behold! The meal was still being prepared. Laughing at his 
surprise. Master Cloudchamber intoned a verse. 

The yellow millet simmers yet uncooked, 

A single dream and you have reached the world beyond! 

Dongbin gaped in astonishment. “Sir,” he stammered, “how is 
it you know about my dream?” 

“In the dream that just came to you,” Master Cloudchamber 
replied matter-of-factly, “you not only scaled the dizziest heights of 
splendor but also plumbed the uttermost depths of misery. Fifty 
years were past and gone in the twinkling of an eye. What you 
gained was not worth rejoicing over, what you lost was not worth 
grieving about. Only when people have a great awakening, they 
know that the world is but one big dream.” 

Impressed by this incident, Dongbin received spiritual enlight¬ 
enment. He fell to his knees before the master and entreated him 
for instruction in the arts of transcending the limitations of this 
earthly sphere. 

To try his determination. Master Cloudchamber said, “Your 
inner stature is not yet fully developed. Before you can attain 



130 


Discipline 


transcendence of this world, many generations shall come and 
pass.” 

[13a] Having uttered these strange words, he suddenly van¬ 
ished into thin air. 

After that Dongbin abandoned his semiofficial position as a 
literatus preparing for examination and lived in retirement. 

Master Cloudchamber duly subjected him to ten tests of his 
immortal stamina. 

The first of these occurred when Dongbin returned home after 
a long journey to find his entire family dead from a mortal sick¬ 
ness. There was no feeling of vain sorrow in his heart. Instead he 
manfully set about making lavish preparations for the funeral, 
when—lo and behold!—they all rose up alive and well. 

The second time Dongbin was put on trial he had sold some 
copper ware to a dealer who soon wanted to return the merchan¬ 
dise and asked for his money back. They sought out the market 
inspector, and Dongbin handed over the required sum without any 
ado. Another day, he was negotiating the sale of some of his belong¬ 
ings and had come to a definite agreement about the price. This 
notwithstanding, the dealer wished to cancel the bargain and pay 
only half the stipulated sum. Dongbin acquiesced and, handing 
over the goods, walked away without anger or engaging in dispute. 

The third ordeal took place at the time of the New Year. As 
Dongbin was leaving his house he was accosted by a beggar de¬ 
manding alms. He handed over all he carried, cash and gifts in 
kind. But the beggar remained dissatisfied and threateningly de¬ 
manded more, using the most abusive terms. Yet Dongbin kept a 
smiling face and again and again apologized to him politely. 

The fourth time he was put to the test, he was looking after 
some sheep in the mountains. A hungry tiger came upon them, 
with the result that the flock scattered in all directions. Dongbin 
interposed his own person between the tiger and the terrified sheep. 
The tiger gave up the chase and crept away. 

In his fifth ordeal he had retired to a simple thatched hut in 
the mountains to study. One day a beautiful lady came to his door, 
graceful and lovely and radiant with such unearthly beauty that 
she was positively dazzling. She explained she was a newly mar¬ 
ried bride on the way to visit her parents but had become lost. 
Would he allow her to rest a short while in his hut? Dongbin granted 
her request. She then tried in a hundred different ways to snare 
him from the path of virtue, but he remained steadfast and un¬ 
moved to the end. 



16. Passing the Test 


131 


Dongbin’s character was put to a test the sixth time when, on 
returning home from a walk in the country, he found that during 
his absence thieves had carried away all his goods and chattels, 
leaving the house bare. Not even then was his equanimity dis¬ 
turbed. He just set himself to earn a livelihood by tilling the ground. 
One day when at work with his hoe he unearthed gold pieces to the 
number of several score. Yet he took not a single one, but quickly 
covered them all up again. 

In his seventh trial he again met Master Cloudchamber who 
told him, “In obedience to the summons of the Celestial Emperor, I 
am on the way to present myself before his throne. If you behave 
virtuously during your abode among humankind, thus acquiring 
merit, you will in time reach a place similar to mine.” 

“My aim,” Dongbin replied with another deep bow, “is not to 
emulate you, sir, but to bring salvation to every living creature in 
this world. Only when this vow of mine has been fulfilled shall I 
ascend on high.” 

The eighth ordeal occurred when he bought some potent drugs 
from a crazy Taoist, who used to wander about selling them in the 
streets. He claimed that whoever partook of his wares would in¬ 
stantly die, but would attain the Tao in a future existence. 

As Dongbin was about to buy the drug, the Taoist warned him, 
“The only thing for you to do now is to make speedy preparation for 
your death.” 

Yet Dongbin swallowed the stuff without batting an eyelid, and 
no harm befell him. 

The ninth test Dongbin had to pass came in the spring when the 
entire country was fiooded. Together with the rest of the local popu¬ 
lation, he was seeking safety in boats. Just as they reached the 
middle of the waters, a violent storm burst upon them. The waves 
rose high, lashed into fury by the wind. All were in a panic except 
Dongbin, who remained erect in his seat, calm and unconcerned. 

On the tenth occasion, Dongbin was sitting alone in his house, 
when without warning there appeared to him an innumerable host 
of demons in weird and terrifying shapes, all seemingly determined 
to beat him to death. Yet he was not in the least afraid or dis¬ 
mayed. Then a sharp word of command came from the sky, and the 
whole crowd of devils vanished. 

The voice was followed by a person who, descending from above, 
clapped his hands and laughed with delight. It was Master Cloudchamber. 

“I have subjected you to ten tests,” he said, “all of which have 
left you utterly unmoved. There can be no doubt you will succeed in 



132 


Discipline 


attaining the Tao. I will now disclose to you the mysteries of al¬ 
chemy in order that the knowledge may enable you to save human¬ 
kind. [13b] When you have continued this meritorious work for 
three thousand years, you will have completed your full period of 
probation. In addition you have to spend eight centuries in re¬ 
search on your own behalf Then, and only then, will you transcend 
the human sphere.” 

“Pray, sir,” Dongbin asked, “when will my transformation take 
place?” 

“Only after three thousand years of meritorious service will 
you be restored to the state of your original physical purity.” 

“Alas!” Dongbin exclaimed, changing color with vexation. “With 
the prospect of having to wait three thousand years, how can I 
maintain my zeal for such a time?” 

“Your courage,” his mentor assured him with a smile, “will 
carry you not only over the three millennia but also over the addi¬ 
tional eight centuries. Have no doubt!” 

Thereupon he took Dongbin to the Crane Ridge and imparted 
to him the most profound truths and deepest mysteries of the Tao, 
including the secret methods of Numinous Treasure. He also pre¬ 
sented him with a few grains of the cinnabar elixir. 

While teacher and disciple were thus engaged, two immortals 
appeared. Each reverently held a golden tablet, the emblem of 
office, in their hands. 

They announced to Master Cloudchamber: “The Celestial Em¬ 
peror summons you to serve as the guardian of the Golden Towers 
in the Ninth Heaven.” 

Master Cloudchamber immediately climbed into the cloudy car¬ 
riage provided for him, and gradually the entourage vanished into 
the open sky. 

Dongbin in due course succeeded in mastering the Tao as taught 
by Master Cloudchamber. He also perfected the magic sword tech¬ 
niques he had received from Master Firedragon. Then he took to 
wandering along the banks of the Yangtse and Huai rivers. 

He put the power of his magical two-edged sword to the test by 
ridding the country of the inundations wrought by a nasty water- 
dragon. He could become invisible to human eyes and transform 
his shape at will. 

For over four hundred years he constantly journeyed around 
the country, visiting places as far apart as Henan and Hunan, 
Zhejiang and Shensi. Nobody ever recognized him. He used to call 
himself the Man Who Returned to the Tao [Hui Daoren]. 



Chapter Five 


PHYSICAL PRACTICES 


Physical exercises are the first active step taken toward the 
Tao. They serve to make the body healthy, to extend its lifespan, 
and to open it up to the free flow of the Tao. 

The Tao in its tangible form on earth is cosmic energy or qi, a 
term hard to define and for which “energy” is no more than a crude 
approximation. Qi is the vital power of the Tao at work in the 
world—in nature, in society, in the human body. It is a continu¬ 
ously changing, forever flowing force, an energy that can appear 
and disappear, can be strong and weak, can be controlled and over¬ 
whelming. Qi is what moves on in the changing rhythm of the 
seasons; qi shines in the rays of the sun; qi is what constitutes 
health or sickness; qi is how we live, move, eat, sleep. 

The goal of all physical practices is to guide and harmonize qi. 
To guide means to control, to strengthen, to increase. To harmonize 
is to free, to open up, to accord with nature. The first step in 
physical cultivation consists therefore of an effort to get on top of 
one’s own inner energies and the patterns of one’s life. Thereafter 
one lets go again and fully adapts to nature, begins to live sponta¬ 
neously in perfect accordance with the Tao. 

Qi, the constituting force of all-that-is, appears in the body in 
various forms. Its grossest and most easily accessible form is the 
breath. Breath is a most fundamental force of life—without breath¬ 
ing in air, the human organism collapses in no time. Breath is also 
very tangible and can be controlled without too much effort. Breath 
is an obvious starting point to get closer to the subtle energies of 
the Tao. Thus breathing exercises are commonly used as the first 
step, as the initial point of control and adaptation to the Tao. 

Then again, qi occurs as the life-force that circulates through¬ 
out the body—visible first of all in the blood and tangible in the 
pulse. Above and beyond this, however, the Chinese traditional 


133 



134 


Physical Practices 


understanding of the body includes a network of energy channels, 
commonly called conduits or meridians, through which pure qi 
passes independent of the blood circulation. These channels come 
closest to the surface of the body and become thus accessible at 
certain pressure points, commonly known as the points used in 
acupuncture. 

To become aware of this flow of energy throughout the body, to 
learn to feel it, regulate it, and open it up to perfect smoothness is 
another important step in the physical practices of the aspiring 
Taoist. Much of this is done in meditations—the concentrated in¬ 
ward gaze, the increasing awareness of subtle movements within. 
But at the same time, the energy flow is also greatly helped by 
exercises—gymnastics and massages, acupuncture and moxibustion. 

Yet another form in which qi appears in the body is the energy 
that arises from nourishment. To align this with the Tao, it is 
necessary to control what one eats: give up ordinary foods and 
substitute special drugs, fast for a time, adapt the diet as much as 
possible to the environment and seasonal changes. This again not 
only purifies the qi and increases the body’s health but also helps 
to harmonize the person as a whole with the ongoing energy trans¬ 
formations of the world. 

Finally, a very important form of qi is sexual energy, the cre¬ 
ative force of life in its most concentrated form. Commonly called 
“essence” and defined as semen in men and menstrual blood in 
women, this too has to be brought into accordance with the Tao. 
While ordinary people tend to emit this energy to the outside, thus 
losing a valuable energy resource, Taoists train to conserve it. “Re¬ 
verting the semen to nourish the brain” is the classical formula, 
applied to both methods of intercourse and meditational forms of 
sexual energy reversion. 

In all these methods, the tendency is to leave the ways of the 
common world behind, to “revert,” to reorganize, to adapt to a level 
subtler and more sensitive than that of ordinary existence. Higher 
forms of Taoist breathing are the opposite of natural breathing; 
gymnastics in many ways use the muscles of the body differently; 
Taoist diet demands the complete abstention from grains, the staple 
diet of the masses; and sexual practice (the way of yin and yang) 
calls for an inner upward movement of “essence” instead of its 
emission for the purpose of reproduction. 

The four texts selected below introduce the major physical prac¬ 
tices. The first, the Yinshizi jingzuo fa (Quiet Sitting with Master 
Yinshi) is a detailed description of Taoist breathing exercises by 



17. Breathing for Life 


135 


Jiang Weiqiao of the early twentieth century. The Daoyin jing (Gym¬ 
nastics Scripture), next, is a collection of gymnastics methods from 
the fourth to the sixth centuries, attributed to various famous im¬ 
mortals. 

Third, the Lingbao wufu xu (Explanation of the Five Talis¬ 
mans of Numinous Treasure) is a fourth-century compendium of 
talismanic lore, myths, and longevity methods. Much of its content 
goes back further, to the Later Han dynasty. Its second scroll con¬ 
sists largely of immortality recipes. 

Fourth, the Yufang bijue (Secret Instructions of the Jade Cham¬ 
ber) is a sexual manual that has survived in the tenth-century 
Ishimpb (Essential Medical Methods). The latter is a standard medi¬ 
cal textbook compiled by the Japanese court physician Tamba no 
Yasuyori and dated to 984. It is a prime source for materials other¬ 
wise lost in China. 


17. Breathing for Life 

Breathing exercises go back far in Chinese history—the earli¬ 
est references are found in the Zhuangzi and in documents exca¬ 
vated from tombs of the Former Han dynasty. Breathing is essential 
for good health and therefore for long life, and it is with breathing 
that the restoration of the body to its more original form begins. 

The Yinshizi jingzuo fa (Quiet Sitting with Master Yinshi) se¬ 
lected below is a modern version of an ancient practice. Compiled 
by Jiang Weiqiao [= Master Yinshi] and first published in 1914, the 
text is edited in the Daozang jinghua, a twentieth-century supple¬ 
ment to the Taoist canon. It represents the personal ways of exer¬ 
cises and meditation developed by Jiang in an effort to heal himself 

Born in the 1870s, Jiang Weiqiao was a sickly child from the 
beginning. In his teenage years he became increasingly unable to 
lead a normal life, but neither Western nor traditional Chinese 
medicine could help him. His condition only improved when he 
found an ancient text on inner alchemy, i.e., traditional Taoist medi¬ 
tation and longevity techniques, and started to follow its instruc¬ 
tions. However, as soon as he felt a little better, he stopped the 
exercises and soon fell back into one weakness or infection after 
the next. 

At the age of twenty-two, he caught the tuberculosis which had 
killed his brother. Then he finally set out to heal himself seriously, 
left his wife and child to be taken care of by the family and estab- 



136 


Physical Practices 


lished himself in a little meditation hut in the backyard. Within a 
year, a strict regimen including exercises, breathings, walks, medi¬ 
tations, and specific diets not only restored his health but brought 
him to spiritual dimensions unthought of. 

This success beyond his wildest expectations led Jiang to write 
up and publish an account of his methods. However, he never sim¬ 
ply copied the ancient texts and concepts but strictly reported only 
on his experiences, interpreting them in the scientific-technological 
terms current in his day. His various writings, of which the book 
here cited is the first, soon inspired others to follow his example. 
Traditional health exercises were unearthed and modified to cure 
everything, from the common cold to cancer. Over several decades, 
the movement mushroomed and grew into what is known as Qigong 
today. It is still flourishing. 

The text is not only one of the clearest descriptions of Taoist 
breathing exercises in the literature. It is also an example for reli¬ 
gion in the making, for the reinterpretation of traditional methods 
in the ever-changing light of the current day. 

Another translation is found in Lu 1964: 171-73. This is more 
extensive and includes large parts of Jiang Weiqiao’s autobiogra¬ 
phy as well as details on his method of meditation or “quiet sit¬ 
ting.” On the development and practice of Qigong in contemporary 
China, see Miura 1989, Kohn 1993. 


Yinshizi jingzuo fa (Quiet Sitting with Master Yinshi) 

Breathing is one of the most essential necessities of human 
life, even more so than food and drink. Ordinary people are quite 
familiar with the idea that food and drink are important to main¬ 
tain life, that they will starve if left without it for a while. But they 
hardly ever turn around to think about the importance of breath¬ 
ing and that air is even more essential to life than anything else. 

This has to do with the fact that in order to obtain food and 
drink people have to go to work and earn money, so they come to 
value these things as important commodities. Breathing, on the 
other hand, is done by taking in the air of the atmosphere of which 
there is no limit and which cannot be exhausted. There is no need 
to labor and pay for the air we breathe; thus people tend to over¬ 
look the importance of this function. 

Yet if you stop eating and drinking, you may still survive for a 
couple of days, even as long as a whole week. However, if you stop 
up your nostrils and mouth you will be dead within minutes. This 
fact alone shows that breathing is far more important than food. 



17. Breathing for Life 


137 


In discussing methods of breathing, two main types can be 
distinguished: natural breathing and regulated breathing. 

Natural Breathing 

One exhalation and one inhalation are called one breath. The 
respiratory organs in the body are the nose on the outside and the 
lungs on the inside. The two wings of the lungs are positioned 
within the upper torso so that through the motion of the respira¬ 
tion the entire area expands and contracts. Such is the law of 
nature. However, in ordinary people, the respiration never expands 
or contracts the lungs to their full capacity. They only use the 
upper section of the lungs while their lower section hardly ever is 
employed at all. Because of this they cannot gain the full advan¬ 
tage of deep breathing, their blood and body fluids are not re¬ 
freshed, and the various diseases gain easy entry. Any of this has 
as yet nothing to do with natural breathing. 

Natural breathing is also called abdominal breathing. Every 
single inhalation, every single exhalation must always go deep down 
into the stomach area. During inhalation, when the air enters the 
lungs, they are filled to capacity and as a result their lower section 
expands. This in turn presses against the diaphragm and pushes 
it downward. Therefore, during inhalation, the chest area is 
completely relaxed while the stomach area is curved toward the 
outside. 

Again, during exhalation the stomach area contracts, the dia¬ 
phragm is pushed upward against the lungs and thereby causes 
the old and turbid breath to be expelled from their depth. Once it is 
all dispersed outside, no used air remains within. Therefore in this 
kind of breathing, although it makes use mostly of the lungs, it is 
the area of the stomach and the diaphragm which expands and 
contracts. This is the great method of breathing naturally by which 
the blood and the body fluids are kept fresh and active. 

Not only during and prior to meditation should this method 
be employed, but always: whether walking, staying, sitting, or 
lying down, one can breathe deeply and naturally in any given 
circumstance. 


Breathing Instructions 


1. Contract the lower abdomen when breathing out. Thereby the 
diaphragm is pushed upward, the chest area is tensed, and all 



138 


Physical Practices 


used breath, even from the lower part of the lungs, is expelled 
entirely. 

2. Breathe in fresh air through the nostrils. Let it fill the lungs to 
capacity so that the diaphragm is pushed down and the stom¬ 
ach area expands. 

3. Gradually lengthen and deepen your inhalations and exhala¬ 
tions. The stomach will get stronger and more stable. Some 
people say that one should hold the breath for a short moment 
at the end of an inhalation. This is called stopping respiration. 
According to my own experience, this is not good for beginners. 

4. As you go along, let the respiration gradually grow subtler and 
finer until the entering and leaving of the breath is very soft. 
With prolonged practice you will cease to be consciously aware 
of the respiration and feel as if you weren’t breathing at all. 

5. Once the state of non-respiration is reached, you can truly be 
without inhalations and exhalations. Even though you have 
special organs for breathing, you won’t feel any longer that you 
are using them. At the same time the breath will by and by 
come to enter and leave through all the body. This is the per¬ 
fection of harmonious breathing. However, as a beginner you 
should never try to attain this intentionally. Always obey na¬ 
ture and go along with what you can do. 

Regulated Breathing 

Regulated breathing is also known as “reversed breathing.” It 
resembles natural breathing in that it is very deep and soft and 
should always reach as far as the stomach area. On the other hand, 
it reverses the movements of the stomach. The upward and down¬ 
ward movement of the diaphragm is accordingly different from its 
activity during natural breathing. It is called “reversed” precisely 
because it reverses the pattern proper to natural breathing. 

Practical Instructions 

1. Exhale slow and far; let the stomach area expand freely, and 
make sure that the stomach is strong and full. 

2. Let the lower abdomen be full of breath, the chest area slack, 
and the diaphragm completely relaxed. 

3. Inhale slowly and deeply into the diaphragm. Let the fresh air 
fill the lungs so that they expand naturally. At the same time 
contract the abdomen. 



17. Breathing for Life 


139 


4. As the lungs are filled with breath they will press down, while 
the stomach, contracted, will push up. The diaphragm is there¬ 
fore pressed in from above and below; its movement is thereby 
getting subtler and subtler. 

5. When the chest area is fully expanded, the stomach region 
may be contracted, yet it should not be entirely empty. Inde¬ 
pendent of whether you inhale or exhale, the center of gravity 
must always be solidly established beneath the navel. Thus 
the stomach area remains strong and full. 

6. All respiration should be subtle and quiet. Especially during 
the practice of quiet sitting it should be so fine that you don’t 
hear the sound of your own breathing. In the old days some 
people claimed that inhalations should be slightly longer than 
exhalations. Nowadays some say that exhalations should be 
slightly longer than inhalations. As far as I can tell, it is best 
to keep their length equal. 

To summarize: Independent of whether you practice natural 
breathing or regulated breathing, the aim is always to activate the 
diaphragm. In the case of regulated breathing, the diaphragm is 
worked by means of human power. It reverses natural breathing and 
thus causes the diaphragm to stretch even farther, to move even 
more smoothly. For this reason I never enter my meditation practice 
without first practicing regulated breathing for a little while. 

This is also the reason why I have recommended its use in my 
book. Since its publication many students have begun the practice. 
Some found the prescribed breathing exercises useful, others didn’t. 
For this reason, always remain aware that even though regulated 
breathing is controlled by the human mind, it cannot be learned by 
human means alone. It is not a mere distortion of natural breath¬ 
ing, but its development, and should be learned in accordance with 
nature. 

Breathing Exercises 

Both natural and regulated breathing have the following eight 
instructions in common: 

1. Sit cross-legged and erect; take the same posture as in quiet 
sitting. 

2. First breathe short breaths, then gradually lengthen them. 

3. All breaths should be slow and subtle, quiet and long. Gradu¬ 
ally they enter deeper into the abdomen. 



140 


Physical Practices 


4. Always inhale through the nose. Do not inhale through the 
mouth. The nose is the specific organ of respiration. There are 
tiny hairs on the inside of the nostrils which are easily blocked 
and obstructed. The mouth, on the other hand, is not made 
primarily for respiration, and if you use it for breathing it will 
usurp the proper function of the nose. This in turn will lead to 
the gradual obstruction of the nose. More than that, by breath¬ 
ing through the mouth any number of bacteria and dirt par¬ 
ticles will enter the body, and diseases are easily conceived. 
Therefore always keep the mouth closed, not only during breath¬ 
ing and meditation practice. 

5. Once your breathing gets purer and warmer with prolonged 
practice, lengthen the individual breaths. The limit of length¬ 
ening is reached when it takes you a whole minute to breathe 
in and out one single breath. However, never forget that this 
cannot be forced. 

6. The practice of slow and subtle breathing can be continued 
any time, any place. 

7. During quiet sitting there should be no thoughts and no wor¬ 
ries. If you have to pay constant attention to your respiration, 
the mind cannot be truly calm. Therefore it is best to practice 
breathing before and after every sitting. 

8. Before and after quiet sitting, practice respiration. Pick a place 
that has good fresh air. Take about five to ten minutes for the 
exercise. 

Breathing and the Lowering of the Pit of the Stomach 

In my discussion of posture above [in a separate section], I 
already spoke about the reason why the pit of the stomach should 
be lowered. Nevertheless, since this lowering is also of central im¬ 
portance in breathing, I come back to it now. Generally, if the pit of 
the stomach is not lowered, the respiration cannot be harmonized. 
Then the effectiveness of quiet sitting will not come to bear. 

Repeating thus what I said before, students should pay atten¬ 
tion to the following points: 

1. During the breathing exercise, beginners should be aware of 
the pit of the stomach being firm and solid. It thus interferes 
with the breath, which cannot be harmonized properly. This is 
because the diaphragm is not yet able to move up and down 
freely. A beginner should overcome this difficulty with determi¬ 
nation and not falter before it. 



18. Gymnastics 


141 


2. Should you become aware that your breathing is obstructed in 
this way, never try to force it open. Rather, let it take its 
natural course by gently focusing your attention on the lower 
abdomen. 

3. Relax your chest so that the blood circulation does not press 
upon the heart. The pit of the stomach will then be lowered 
naturally. 

4. Practice this over a long period. Gradually the chest and the 
diaphragm will feel open and relaxed. The breathing will be 
calm and subtle, deep and continuous. Every inhalation and 
exhalation will reach all the way to the center of gravity below 
the navel. This, then, is proof that the pit of the stomach has 
been effectively lowered. 


18. Gymnastics 

Chinese gymnastics are physical exercises and self-massages 
geared to opening up the energy channels (conduits, meridians) 
that crisscross the entire body. Energy, as the most accessible as¬ 
pect of the Tao on earth, should pervade everything smoothly, in 
nature, in human society, and in the body. It should be neither 
overabundant nor insufficient or obstructed in any way. 

By moving the limbs and torso in a particular way, combined 
with deep respiration, the flow of energy is regulated and patho¬ 
genic elements are expelled. Gradually the body not only becomes 
supple and flexible but overall health improves and longevity is 
attained. 

Gymnastics have been popular since antiquity, as the Daoyin 
tu (Gymnastics Chart) documents. This chart, found in a Han tomb 
at Mawangdui (168 b.c.e.), consists of a series of illustrations of 
physical exercises with short captions. Even then, as still in Qigong 
today, the practices had colorful names: bear hangings, bird 
stretchings, monkey leaps, owl glares, and so on. 

The Daoyin jing (Gymnastics Scripture) contains a collection of 
different methods of gymnastics popular in medieval China and 
each associated with a classical ancient immortal. From references 
to certain flgures and comparisons with other texts, the methods 
can be dated to the fourth to sixth centuries. In its present form, 
however, the text has only been known since the tenth. 

Its full title is Taiqing daoyin yangsheng jing (Great Clarity 
Scripture on Nourishing Life Through Gymnastics). The version used 
here is found in Yunji qiqian 34 (la-3b and 6b-8a). Other editions of 



142 


Physical Practices 


the text are contained in DZ 818, fasc. 568 and in chapter 28 of the 
Daoshu (Pivot of the Tao; DZ 1017, fasc. 641-48), a Song-dynasty 
compendium on Taoist health and meditation methods. 

A partial translation of the Daoyin jing is found in Maspero 
1981: 543-47. For a discussion of the gymnastic tradition, see 
Despeux 1989. The author w^ishes to thank Ute Engelhardt for her 
critical reading of the translation. 


Daoyin jing (Gymnastics Scripture) 

Master Redpine’s Method of Gymnastics 

[la] Master Redpine [Chisongzi] was the Lord of Rain under 
the Divine Farmer [Shennong]. He could follow the wind, freely 
rising up and sinking down. He was active well into the time of 
High Toil [Gaoxin]. 

Today we still have his method of gymnastics, which suppos¬ 
edly expels the hundred diseases, extends one’s years, and prolongs 
life. It runs as follows: 

When you first rise in the morning, spread a mat and exercise 
facing east. Stop when your breath has reached full depth or after 
live respirations, if your breath is still shallow. The exercise should 
be undertaken regularly every day. Over a longer period, you will 
feel a definite improvement. 

The Exercises 

1. Stand on your mat. Interlace your fingers above your head. 
Stretch up, then bend to the ground. Continue for five breaths. 
This fills the abdomen with energy. 

2. Lie down on your right side and try to touch the ground to your 
left with your left elbow. Then stretch the left arm as much as 
you can and reach beyond your head, [lb] Repeat the exercise 
with your right arm while lying on your left side. Continue for 
five breaths. This stretches the muscles and the backbone. 

3. [Lie on your back.] Place both hands around your right knee 
and pull it up towards your waist and groin, raising your head 
at the same time to meet it. Repeat with the left knee. Con¬ 
tinue for five breaths. This stretches the hips. 

4. Place your right hand on your left knee, raised above your hip. 
Then stretch your left hand upward as far as you can. Repeat 
on the other side. Continue for five breaths. This expands the 
energy of the chest and abdomen. 



18. Gymnastics 


143 



Fig. 13. Chisongzi, Master Redpine. Source: Zengxiang liexian zhuan. 

5. Place your left hand next to your hip and pull down. At the 
same time, stretch your right arm upward as far as you can. 
Repeat on the other side. Continue for five breaths. This ex¬ 
pands the energy in the center of the body. 









144 


Physical Practices 


6. [Sit up or kneel.] Fold your arms across your chest. Turn your 
head left and right. Hold your breath as long as you can. This 
stretches the face and ear muscles. It expels pathogenic energy 
and prevents it from reentering the body. 

7. Link your hands behind your back and below your buttocks. 
Turn your torso to the right and left as far as you can. This 
opens the vessels of the blood-energy. 

8. Interlace your fingers in front of your body. Stretch your arms 
forward and turn then to the right and left as far as you can. 
This expands the energy in the shoulders. 

9. [2a] Interlace your fingers and stretch your arms above your 
head [with palms facing outward]. Turn left and right in an 
easy rhythm. This expands the energy of the lungs and the 
liver. 

10. Fold your hands across your chest. Turn left and right as far 
as you can. This expels tense and restive energy from the skin. 

11. Interlace your fingers and bring the hands to your shoulders, 
right and left. This expands the energy of the skin. 

12. Stand up straight. Stretch your calves left and right [by bend¬ 
ing over]. This expands the energy of the legs. 

Master Ning’s Way of Nourishing Life Through Gymnastics 

Master Ning lived under the Yellow Emperor, whom he served 
as master of pottery. He could stack up a fire, place himself in its 
center, and freely move up and down with the arising smoke. At 
the same time, his clothes would not even be singed. 

According to Master Ning, the practice of gymnastics and the 
guiding of energy through the body serve to expel the hundred 
diseases, prolong life, and prevent aging. 

To practice properly, always keep your mind firmly concen¬ 
trated on the One and return it to the Cinnabar Field in the abdo¬ 
men. What brings people to life is the cinnabar; what affords them 
salvation is the act of returning. 

Once the cinnabar is fully restored, you can extend your years. 
On the other hand, when the cinnabar is lost, the inner worms will 
become active and you will die early. 

We practice gymnastics because they make all the pathogenic 
energy evaporate from our limbs, bones, and joints. [2b] Thus only 
good energy prevails and can become more pure and essential. 

Practice the exercises diligently and with care whenever you 
have time between work and conversation. Either in the morning 



18. Gymnastics 


145 


or at night is fine. Gradually your bones and joints will become 
firm and strong. The hundred diseases will be eliminated com¬ 
pletely. 

Whether you have caught a chill [wind-attack disorder] in your 
chest or are thoroughly fatigued and cannot rouse yourself; 

whether you have periods of deafness when you cannot hear or 
find your eyes going dizzy and your mind turning mad on you; 

whether you have energy moving against its proper current 
and rising up violently or experience severe pains in your hips— 
in all cases you can actively expel the disease by practicing 
these exercises and guiding the energy to the place of trouble, 
following the proper charts and focusing it on the right spot. 

By guiding the energy you will supplement the energy of your 
spleen and stomach systems; by practicing gymnastics you will 
heal your four limbs. 

Thus following the Tao of natural spontaneity as diligently as 
you can, you will attain a state of mutual protection with heaven 
and earth. 


The Exercises 

1. Loosen your hair and stand facing east; make your hands into 
fists and hold your breath for the count of one. Then raise your 
arms alternately left and right and stretch them so that your 
hands touch your ears. [Breathe and repeat.] This will keep 
your hair black and prevent graying. 

2. Kneel facing east and hold your breath to the count of two. 
Then take the middle fingers of your hands and moisten their 
tips with saliva. Rub them against each other for twice seven 
times. Then gently massage your eyes with them. [3a] This 
will keep your eyes bright and shining. 

3. Kneel facing east and hold your breath to the count of three. 
Then pinch your two nostrils between your fingers. This will 
cure shortness of nasal breath due to too much flesh and ob¬ 
structions in the nostrils. 

4. Kneel facing east and hold your breath to the count of four. 
Clap your teeth together as often as you can. Then lean over to 
the front and change your legs to kneel sideways. Repeat, hold¬ 
ing your breath to the count of six. This will take care of 
deafness and dizziness. Return to your original posture. Re¬ 
peat, holding your breath to the count of seven. This will free 
you from all pain in the chest. 



Fig. 14. A Taoist Practicing Gymnastics. Source: Xiuzhen shishu. 





18. Gymnastics 


147 


5. Put both hands on your knees and stand up on tiptoe. Hold 
your breath to the count of eight. This will free you from all 
ailments above the chest, i.e., those of the head, ears, eyes, 
throat, and nose. 

6. Make both your hands into fists and clasp them to the back of 
your head. Hold your breath. Rise up on your toes. Hold your 
breath to the count of nine. Face east. This causes energy to 
move up and down smoothly, opens and deepens its passage 
through the nostrils, and cures all emaciation and weakness. 

Warning: Those who cannot follow the ways of yin and yang [3b] 
should not practice this. 

The Way of Gymnastics According to Pengzu 

[6b] Pengzu was a high official under the Shang dynasty. He 
lived through both the Xia and Shang dynasties—altogether for 
over seven hundred years. He lived primarily on cinnamon and 
frequently practiced gymnastics. [7a] According to him, gymnastics 
are the best way to expel the hundred diseases, extend one’s years, 
and increase longevity. 

His method of gymnastics proceeds in ten sections of five breaths 
each, i.e., fifty breaths total. Repeating the exercises five times, one 
breathes altogether 250 times. The practice should always be un¬ 
dertaken between midnight and cock crow, never during the day. 
Also, practitioners should always eat their fill and bathe their bod¬ 
ies regularly. 


The Exercises 

1. Loosen your clothes and lie down on your back. Stretch your 
hips, then close your eyes and rest for a short moment. Breathe 
five times. This expands the energy of the kidneys, cures dia¬ 
betes, and helps the yin and yang. 

2. Sit up and grab hold of your toes. Breathe five times. This 
expands the energy of the abdomen, cures pains and ruptures 
in the lower abdomen and genital area, and helps to clear the 
nine orifices. 

3. Raise your torso and stretch your toes. Breathe five times. 
This expands the energy of the abdomen and the spine. It 
cures localized pain disorders and stiffness and makes the hear¬ 
ing more acute. 



148 


Physical Practices 


4. [7b] Turn your feet so the toes face each other. Breathe five 
times. This expands the energy of the heart and lungs. It takes 
care of coughs and of all ailments due to energy flowing in the 
reverse direction. 

5. Turn your feet so the heels face each other. Breathe five times. 
This cleans the energies in the five network conduits. It helps 
the intestines and the stomach and expels all pathogenic en¬ 
ergy. 

6. Take your left shin and bend it so that it comes to rest covered 
by the right knee. Breathe five times. This expands the energy 
of the lungs. It takes care of all energy depletions caused by 
wind and sharpens the eyesight. 

7. Stretch out both legs well down to the toes. Breathe five times. 
This ensures that you won’t twist and cramp your muscles and 
tendons. 

8. Lie back. Grasp both knees with your hands and pull them 
close to your chest. Breathe five times. This cures pain in the 
hips. 

9. Turn both feet to the outside. Repeat ten times. This takes 
care of fatigue. 

10. Loosen your hair and sit up facing east. Clench your hands to 
fists and hold your breath for a moment. Then raise both your 
arms above your head and alternatingly stretch them upward. 
Next, place your palms over your ears and, with your fingers, 
massage the pressure points around them. Repeat five times. 
This improves your eyesight, [8a] keeps your hair glossy black, 
and cures all ailments of the head. 


19. Drugs and Diets 

Taoist diet centers around a practice known as the “abstention 
from grains.” Besides avoiding both meat and alcohol like their 
Buddhist counterparts, although for reasons of physical purifica¬ 
tion rather than moral rectitude, Taoists also avoid the staple diet 
of China, the grains—rice, millet, wheat, as well as beans. 

The mythological reason for this abstention is the existence of 
three worms in the body, demonic supernatural creatures who feed 
on decay and are eager for the body to die altogether so they can 
devour it. Not only do they thus shorten the lifespan but they also 
delight in the decaying matter produced by the grains as they are 
digested in the intestines. If one is to attain long life, the three 



19. Drugs and Diets 


149 


worms have to be starved, and the only way to do so is to avoid 
all grain. 

On a more historical note, the avoidance of grain signifies the 
Taoist reversion and rejection of common social practices. It is a re¬ 
turn to a time in the dawn of humanity when there were as yet no 
grains; it is also a return to a more primitive and simple way of eating. 

Physically, abstention from grains means either nourishing on 
vegetables and minerals, preferably concocted into some form of 
drug, or living on energy. The latter is done by swallowing the 
saliva, another form in which the qi appears in the body, or by 
“ingesting the five sprouts,” i.e., the energy of the five directions, by 
visualizing them congealing into pellets and entering through one’s 
mouth into the proper part of the body. 

In either case, Taoist diet has the effect of lightening the body, 
eliminating wastes, and stabilizing the circulation. It helps the 
metabolism recover its original balance and thus a more funda¬ 
mental accordance with the Tao. 

The selection below is taken from the Taishang lingbao wufuxu 
(Explanation of the Five Talismans of Numinous Treasure), found 
in DZ 388, fasc. 183 (3.21b-22a and 2.1a-3a). While the text was 
compiled in the fourth century, the methods are very ancient, with 
Lezichang, the compiler, a magico-technician and immortal of the 
Han dynasty. On the text and its dietetic methods, see Yamada 
1989. For a general discussion of Taoist diet, see Levi 1983, 
Engelhard! 1987. 


Taishang lingbao wufuxu (Explanation of the Five Talismans 
of Numinous Treasure 

[3.21b] The Third Immortal King told the Emperor: 

“In the old days I followed a dietetic regimen and attained 
immortality. My teacher made me increase the sweet spring in my 
mouth and swallow it in accordance with the following incantation: 

The white stones, hard and rocky, are rolling on and on. 

The gushing spring, bubbling and pervasive, becomes a 
thick juice. 

Drink it and attain long life— 

Longevity forever longer! 

“These twenty-two words—you should follow them! 

“If you can actually do this and nourish on the True One with¬ 
out stopping, swallow from your flowery pond without interruption. 



150 


Physical Practices 


then your inner energy will grow and remain strong, never to be 
weakened. [22a] You attain the Tao by avoiding all grains. You will 
never again have to follow the rhythm of the moon and plant or 
harvest. 

“Now, the people of mysterious antiquity, they reached old age 
because they remained in leisure and never ate any grains. 

“As the Dayou zhang (Verse of Great Existence) says: 

The five grains are chisels cutting life away. 

Making the five organs stink and shorten our spans. 

Once entered into our stomach. 

There’s no more chance to live quite long. 

To strive for complete avoidance of all death 
Keep your intestines free of excrement!” 

The Numinous Treasure Way of Eating the Essence of the Five 

WONDERPLANTS 


Pine Resin 

[2.1a] The Venerable Lord said: When a pine tree has grown 
for a thousand years, its resin is so concentrated that, by eating it, 
you can pervade all in your spirit. You can enter into the depth of 
the earth, hide your true identity and change your name at will. 

The needles and stem of a pine tree are rather large, following 
the plant’s roots in their shape. Its resin is also called “magnificent 
joy” [black amber] or again “truffle fungus.” 

With its help you can become immune to weapons. You can 
pass freely over land and through water, leave the obscure and 
enter the serene. You will be free from hunger and thirst and live 
as long as the sun and the moon. 

If you can find the resin of a thousand-year-old pine, you can 
truly live long! 


Sesame 

The Venerable Lord said: Nourish your body with this “little 
louse” and you will recover a healthy complexion and return to 
youthfulness. 

Another name of this plant is “barbarian hemp.” The reason 
for this is that it originally comes from Ferghana in the lands of 
the barbarians. After it had grown there wild for ten thousand 
years, it crossed the border and came east. 



19. Drugs and Diets 


151 


If kept deep in the earth, it is a powerful drug against all 
danger and fierceness. If soaked in boiled water, it can ward off 
wind and expel cold. 

It has the most appropriate name of “giant victor.” This is due 
to the fact that it repels all kinds of evil and demonic powers and 
pursues them to their end. 

Take it without interruption and you will live as long as the 
world itself 


Pepper 

[lb] The Venerable Lord said: Pepper grows in both the regions 
of Shu and of Han [southwest and central China]. 

Since it contains the energy of great yin, it will allow you to 
live as long as heaven and earth, to transform and change your 
body at will, and to pass freely over land and through water. With 
pepper you can ward off dampness. 

None of the many pathogenic influences will dare to come near 
you. As long as you eat pepper, there is not a single demon, magical 
evil, or poison that you cannot stop in its tracks. 

If you nourish on it permanently, you can fulfill all the wishes 
of your heart’s desire. However, you must keep the method hidden 
from the world, since the practice is very profound. Keep it in strict 
confidence and never give it away. Then you won’t need a lot of gold 
to realize your goals. 


Ginger 

The Venerable Lord said: Ginger grows in areas of strong yang, 
in the same regions as pepper. Both develop only in very fertile 
soil, preferably in remote mountain places. They grow straight up 
and never bow or bend, but need to be near a fresh spring of water. 

Ginger contains the energy of the fiery planet [Mars] and sticks 
firmly to soil with its root. It turns its back toward yin and faces 
yang. It is as eternal as the world itself 

For these reasons it helps to ward off dampness and expels 
cold. It induces warmth and keeps all pathogenic influences at bay. 
It cuts short all illness and firmly closes the demon gateways of the 
body. 

If you nourish on ginger all the time, you will live as long as 
the trigrams of Heaven and Earth themselves. 



152 


Physical Practices 


Calamus 

The Venerable Lord said: Calamus grows in wetlands, near 
deep ponds, in damp depressions, or on river banks. [2a] It may 
also be found on high mountains, with its roots knotted about rocks 
and boulders. 

One inch of calamus contains nine sections or joints, which is 
why it is also called “numinous body.” Holding on solidly to the 
One, it contains the myriad forms of primordial energy. 

Thus calamus gives life to people, nurtures and protects es¬ 
sence and spirit. It drains superfluous body liquids and drives out 
dampness. It repels demons and dissolves all feelings of ill. 

All spectres, sprites, and weird otherwordly creatures will flee 
from it and seek refuge in dark obscurity. Anything or anyone 
violent and harmful will never dare to come close. 

Take it without interruption and you can live thousands and 
thousands of years. 


Note 

Lezichang says: These five wonderplants can each be taken 
separately. They will all increase energy and secure long life. They 
expand one’s essence and stabilize one’s soul. Taking them without 
interruption, one can live as long as the world itself 

Thus the Xiaojing yuanshenqi (Guidance of Spirit According to 
the Classic of Filial Piety) says: 

Ginger and pepper increase energy; 

Calamus improves the hearing; 

Sesame secures long life; 

And pine resin wards off calamities. 

Thus are the secret words of Confucius, the enlightened in¬ 
structions of the sages. 

Methods of the Venerable Lord to Observe the Heavens and 
Combine the Five Wonderplants Thereby to Retain the Spirit, 
Lengthen the Years, Transcend the World, and Live Forever 

Recipe of the Three Heavens of Numinous Treasure 
(Compiled by Lezichang) 

[2b] Ingredients: Five parts sesame; four parts pine resin; one 
part pepper; three parts ginger; three parts calamus. (Best used if 
very fresh and full in essence.) 



20. Sexual Techniques 


153 


Have all five separately pounded by a young boy on a day ruled 
by the sun. Never employ any other person to do the pounding. 
Then, again each separately, sift them through a fine sieve. Pound 
again, 10,000 times. 

Set in five separate vessels of red ware. Line up. Let stand 
overnight to collect the dew. 

Next morning, at sunrise, scoop out with a sanctified dipper. 
Mix together, using white honey or sugar as a cohesive. 

Pound again, 30,000 times, to form little pellets the size of seeds. 

Next day, at sunrise, kneel facing east. Take three pellets. 
Pray for long life. Your prayer will be granted. 

Evening, at sunset, kneel facing west. Take three pellets. Pray 
as before. 

[Continue daily.] 

During the entire process, strictly avoid all fresh fish, pork, 
and strong vegetables. Under no circumstances look upon dead 
bodies, dogs or pigs, or birthings. [3a] Be very careful! 


20. Sexual Techniques 

Taoist sexual techniques are just as ancient as the other physi¬ 
cal practices and were also discussed in early manuscripts exca¬ 
vated from Han-dynasty tombs. They form an integral part of Taoist 
practice, both individual and communal, and especially the Celes¬ 
tial Masters have been frequently attacked for their allegedly 
orgiastic practice of “harmonizing the energies,” a form of ritual 
intercourse. 

According to the mythology, sexual techniques were first taught 
by a celestial lady called the Plain Maiden (Sunii) to the Yellow 
Emperor (Huangdi). The major sexual classic of China is accord¬ 
ingly called the Sunii jing. Many other manuals followed in its 
footsteps, specifiying not only various postures and methods of 
arousal, but also including warnings about health hazards and 
remedial uses of intercourse. Sexual practices have thus formed an 
important aspect of both the medical and religious traditions. 

In Taoism, the aim of sexual techniques is to revert the “es¬ 
sence” to support the body instead of flowing out and being lost. 
Sexual arousal, and thus intercourse, in this context serves to acti¬ 
vate the essence that lies hidden deep in the body and bring it to 
the surface. Only when essence is tangible can it be reverted, can— 
by sheer concentration and pressure applied at the right moment— 
the valuable substance be used to further long life. 



154 


Physical Practices 


TVpically manuals are directed to the male, encouraging men 
to select young partners and change them frequently, making the 
women give up their essence but never ejaculating themselves. The 
interpretation of sexual vampirism has been offered for this behav¬ 
ior but was rejected in favor of an understanding that sees the 
practices as a way of creating harmony between the sexes. Some 
readings have even gone so far as to suggest that they pay tribute 
to the importance of women in Taoism. 

On the other hand, ideally women can do the very same thing, 
using men—preferably young— to garner essence and revert it to 
nourish their longevity. In this case, however, Chinese folklore has 
created the character of the fox lady, a supernatural fairy who 
exploits men sexually and makes them wither away and die. 

In the more meditational practices of inner alchemy, the rever¬ 
sal of sexual energy is undertaken in meditative fashion and with¬ 
out the involvement of a partner. Methods differ for men and women, 
but according to contemporary reports, are still undertaken suc¬ 
cessfully. Taoist nuns in particular report that, with the help of 
breast massages and meditational circulation of essence, they 
stopped menstruating and developed heightened levels of vigor and 
wellbeing. Needless to say that the ladies in question have by now 
reached venerable old age. 

The text selected here is entitled “Sexual Instructions of the 
Master of Pure Harmony.” It is from the Yufang bijue (Secret In¬ 
structions of the Jade Chamber), a text nowadays contained in the 
Ishimpb (Essential Medical Methods). The latter is a medical text¬ 
book by the Japanese court physician Tamba no Yasuyori and dated 
to the year 984. The edition used is the one published by the Renmin 
Weisheng Publishing Company (Beijing, 1955). Selections are 
from chapter 28 (pp. 635-36 and 645-46). The translation follows 
Wile 1992: 102-03 with minor alterations. Subheadings are the 
author’s. 

For other translations of the text, as part of a rendering of a 
wider selection of similar documents, see Ishihara and Levi 1970. 
On the Ishimpb and other Japanese collections on Taoist longevity 
techniques, see Sakade 1989. For early manuscripts on sexual tech¬ 
niques, see Harper 1987. 

An insightful discussion of the history of sexual practices and 
the relations between the sexes in traditional Chinese culture is 
found in van Gulik 1961. Inner alchemical forms of sexual prac¬ 
tices are discussed in Lu 1970 (for men) and Despeux 1990 (for 
women). For a contemporary inner-alchemical use of sexual energy 



20. Sexual Techniques 


155 


to relieve stress in Western societies, see Chia 1986, 1987, 1987a. On 
fox ladies and the damage they may do, see Krappe 1944, Veith 1963. 


“Sexual Instructions of the Master of Pure Harmony”, from 
Yufang bijue (Secret Instructions of the Jade Chamber) 

Nourishing the Yang 

[635] The Master of Pure Harmony [Chonghezi] says: Those 
who would cultivate their yang energy must not allow women to 
steal glimpses of this art. Not only is this of no benefit to one’s yang 
energy, but it may even lead to injury or illness. This is what is 
called: “Lend a man your sword and when the time comes to roll up 
sleeves for a fight you cannot win.” 

According to Pengzu the Long-Lived, if a man wishes to derive 
the greatest benefit [from sexual techniques], it is best to find a 
woman who has no knowledge of them. He also had better choose 
young maidens for mounting, because then his complexion will 
become like a maiden’s. When it comes to women, one should be 
vexed only by their not being young. It is best to obtain those 
between fourteen or fifteen and eighteen or nineteen. In any event, 
they should never be older than thirty. Even those under thirty are 
of no benefit if they have given birth. My late master handed down 
these methods and himself used them to live for three thousand 
years. If combined with drugs, they will even lead to immortality. 

In practicing the union of yin and yang to increase your energy 
and cultivate long life, do not limit yourself to just one woman. Much 
better to get three, nine, or eleven: the more the better! Absorb her 
secreted essence by mounting the “vast spring” and reverting the 
essence upward. Your skin will become glossy, your body light, your 
eyes bright, and your energy so strong that you will be able to 
overcome all your enemies. Old men will feel like twenty and young 
men will feel their strength increased a hundredfold. 

When having intercourse with women, as soon as you feel your¬ 
self aroused, change partners. By changing partners you can 
lengthen your life. If you return habitually to the same woman, her 
yin energy will become progressively weaker and this will be of 
little benefit to you. 

The Taoist master Gray Ox [Qingniu] agrees that it is very 
beneficial to change female partners frequently. More than ten in 
one night is especially good. If one constantly has intercourse with 
the same woman, he insists, her yin energy will become weak. This 



156 


Physical Practices 


is not only of no great benefit to the man, but will cause her to 
become thin and emaciated. 

Nourishing the Yin 

[636] The Master of Pure Harmony says: It is not only that 
yang can be cultivated, but yin too. The Queen Mother of the West, 
for example, attained the Tao by cultivating her yin energy. As soon 
as she had intercourse with a man he would immediately take sick, 
while her complexion would be ever more radiant without the use 
of rouge or powder. She always ate curds and plucked the five¬ 
stringed lute in order to harmonize her heart and concentrate her 
mind. She was quite without any other desire. 

The Queen Mother had no husband but was fond of intercourse 
with young boys. If this is not fit to be taught to the world, how is it 
that such an elevated personage as the Queen Mother herself prac¬ 
ticed it? 

When having intercourse with a man, first calm your heart 
and still your mind. If the man is not yet fully aroused, wait for his 
energy to arrive and slightly restrain your emotion to attune your¬ 
self to him. Do not move or become agitated, lest your yin essence 
become exhausted first. If this happens, you will be left in a defi¬ 
cient state and susceptible to cold wind illnesses. 

For example, there are women who become jealous and vexed 
when they hear that their husbands have intercourse with another 
woman. Then their yin essence is aroused, they sit up indignantly, 
and the essential secretions come forth spontaneously. Wanness 
and premature aging result from this. Therefore, exercise restraint 
with your yin energy and be extremely careful. 

If a woman knows the way of cultivating her yin and causing 
the two energies to unite in harmony, they can be transformed into a 
male child. If she does not have intercourse for the sake of offspring, 
she can divert the fluids to flow back into the hundred vessels [of her 
body]. By using yang to nourish yin, the various ailments disappear, 
her complexion becomes radiant and her flesh strong. Then she can 
enjoy long life without aging and be young forever. 

If a woman is able to master this Tao and has frequent inter¬ 
course with men, she can avoid all grain for nine days without 
getting hungry. Even those who are sick and have sexual relations 
with ghosts attain this ability to fast. But they become emaciated 
after a while. So, how much more beneficial must it be to have 
intercourse with men? 



20. Sexual Techniques 


157 


Counterindications 

[645] The Master of Pure Harmony says: If you have inter¬ 
course while indulging in emotional extremes and unbridled pas¬ 
sion, you will suffer harm and get ill. This is obvious to those with 
experience in sexual relations. Because you may become ill from 
this, you may also be cured by it. It is quite like curing a hangover 
by means of more wine. 

Again, if you have intercourse with your eyes open, gazing 
upon your partner’s body, or if you light a fire so you can look at 
illustrated manuals, you will get dizziness in your eyes or even 
turn blind. To recover, have intercourse at night with your eyes 
closed. 

If, moreover, during intercourse you place your partner upon 
your belly and raise your middle from below to join her, you may 
develop pain in the hips, tension in the lower abdomen, cramps in 
the feet, and strain in the back. To cure this condition, turn over so 
that you are on top. Then straighten your body and play at your 
leisure. 

If you have intercourse by approaching your partner from the 
side and lifting her buttocks with your hands, you may get pain in 
the ribs. To get better, lie straight and play in a relaxed manner. 

If you have intercourse with your head lowered and throat 
stretched out, your head will get heavy and your neck stiff. To 
effect a cure, place your head on your partner’s forehead and not 
lower it. 

Intercourse when overly full. If you have sex at midnight, be¬ 
fore you have fully digested your evening meal, you may develop 
chest pain and fullness of energy. Indications are a pulling sensa¬ 
tion beneath the ribs and pressure in the breast, as if it were being 
torn. You will lose your appetite for food and drink, feel a blocking 
knot beneath your heart, sometimes even vomit green and yellow 
bile. Your stomach will feel tense with the fullness of energy and 
there will be a slow and irregular pulse. Sometimes in addition 
there may be nosebleeds, hardness or pain beneath the ribs, and 
sores on the face. To heal this, have intercourse after midnight and 
close to the approach of dawn. 

Intercourse under the influence of wine. While intoxicated, you 
may recklessly use force to penetrate to the extreme. This will 
certainly make you sick. Yellow or black jaundice and energy pains 
beneath the ribs are the first symptoms. If you continue like this, 
you will get a feeling between the thighs as if the scrotum were full 



158 


Physical Practices 


of water. This extends up to the shoulders and arms. In extreme 
cases, there is pain in the chest and the back, coughing and spit¬ 
ting of blood, and rising energy. To cure this, abstain from wine and 
have intercourse close to the approach of dawn. Thus you can dally 
at leisure while relaxing the body. 

Intercourse when overdue for urination. This will lead to in¬ 
continence, energy pressure in the lower abdomen, and difficulty in 
urinating. There is pain in the jade stalk and a frequent urge to 
grip it with the hand. After a moment again one feels like urinat¬ 
ing. To get better, first urinate, then lie down and settle yourself. 
After a little while, have intercourse at your leisure. 

Intercourse when overdue to move the bowels. This causes 
piles and difficulty in vacating the bowels. After some days and 
months there will be dripping pus and blood, and sores will appear 
around the anus resembling bee hives. Straining at stool, the bow¬ 
els do not move in timely fashion. In this pain and bloating you 
find no rest even by lying down. To cure this by means of sexual 
techniques, rise at cockcrow and use the bathroom. Then return to 
your bed, settle yourself comfortably and slowly engage in playful 
dalliance. When your entire body is deeply relaxed, cause your 
partner to be slippery with secretions, then withdraw. The illness 
will be wonderfully cured. The same method also helps in female 
maladies. 

Exceeding the proper measure. This results in beads of sweat 
the size of pearls. You will roll from side to side to let some cool air 
under the coverlets. When then your essence is empty and your 
energy exhausted, wind and harmful energies will enter the body 
and you will get sick. Gradually you get weaker until you are lame 
and cannot even raise your hand to your head. To remedy this, 
nourish your essence and spirit, and take regular decoctions of 
foxglove. 

Healing Efforts 

The Master of Pure Harmony says: According to Wu Zidu, to 
improve your eyesight, wait for the impulse to ejaculate, then raise 
your head, hold the breath, and expel the air with a loud sound, 
while rolling your eyes to the left and right. Then contract your 
abdomen and revert the essence upward so that it enters the hun¬ 
dred vessels of the body. 

To prevent deafness, wait for the impulse to ejaculate and then 
inhale deeply. Clench the teeth and hold the breath. [646] Produce 



20. Sexual Techniques 


159 


a humming sound in the ears, then contract the abdomen, concen¬ 
trate on your energy and circulate it mentally throughout the body 
until it becomes very strong. Even in old age you will never lose 
your hearing. 

To improve the functioning of your five inner organs, to facili¬ 
tate digestion and cure the hundred ills, wait for the approach of 
ejaculation, then expand your belly and use the mind to move the 
energy around the body. Next, contract your belly again so that the 
essence disperses and reverts to the hundred vessels. Then pen¬ 
etrate your partner nine times shallow and once deeply between 
her zither strings and grain ears. All strong and good energy will 
return, while all bad and ill energy will depart. 

To prevent pain in the lower back, stand against a wall and 
stretch out the waist without letting your head incline either too 
far forward or too far back. Level all those places where the lower 
back does not make contact with the wall. During the sex act in 
this position you should then strive for energy circulation. In order 
to supplement deficiency, to nourish your body and cure diseases, 
you must refrain from ejaculating when the desire arises. Instead 
you have to recirculate your essence throughout the body. Your 
entire circulation will feel wonderfully warm. 



Chapter Six 


THE COSMIC BODY 


Made supple, light, and healthy through the application of the 
various physical practices, the body becomes a more cosmic entity 
and is recognized as a microcosm, a universe in itself. The body, 
from the mere physical accumulation of different fluids, flesh, and 
bones, is turned gradually into a full-fledged residence of the Tao, 
into a cosmos within. 

The advancing Taoist develops a new understanding of the body. 
It begins with the vision of traditional Chinese medicine of the 
body as a network of energy channels, pulses, moving fluids, circu¬ 
lation, breaths, various faculties, and inner organs. This vision 
centers around the so-called five orbs, five inner organs—the liver, 
heart, spleen, lungs, and kidneys—which are not only associated 
and intricately linked but structurally one with the five senses, five 
emotions, five forms of body tissue, five psychic centers, and so on. 

The basic system that lies at the root of this vision is the cosmol¬ 
ogy of the Five Agents—wood, fire, earth, metal, and water—in con¬ 
junction with the directions, seasons, colors, tastes, grains, and many, 
many more. Developed first in the Han dynasty, this cosmology is 
fundamental to most traditional Chinese thought and has left its 
thorough imprint on both medical and Taoist thinking. 

The five orbs in this context are the entire network associated 
with the five organs. Any reference made to any of them, e.g., the 
“liver,” connotes the entire fabric of functional manifestations re¬ 
lated to this orb. Consequently “liver” includes the working of the 
muscles and sinews and also corresponds to the sense of vision and 
the eyes, to the emotion of anger, and the seat of the spiritual soul. 

More specifically, the five orbs indicate the five organs in their 
function as receptacles and storage spaces for the qi. They are 
furthermore associated with six intestines, i.e., gall bladder, blad¬ 
der, small intestine, large intestine, stomach, and the navel or some- 


161 



162 


The Cosmic Body 


times the triple heater. Where the orbs store, the intestines pro¬ 
cess. While the orbs are supporting and yin in quality, the intes¬ 
tines are productive and yang. 

In Chinese medicine, health is defined as the smooth and 
fiawless interaction of the various parts of the body, especially the 
network of the five orbs as it continues to interact with the sea¬ 
sons, the weather, the planets, society—with the entire outside 
world that works basically according to the same scheme of con¬ 
tinuous alteration and change. 

In Taoism, however, this is only the first step toward a more 
subtle and ultimately reversed union with the Tao. Where Chinese 
medicine is content with balancing the energy flow—reducing an 
overload, supplementing an insufficiency—^Taoist practice moves 
on to develop the body back toward the level of primordial energy, 
to the state at the beginning of creation. The body, no longer a 
mere means to live harmoniously in the world, becomes a universe 
in itself. 

The Taoist understanding of the body therefore views it as 
incorporating the entire cosmos. Every single part of the body cor¬ 
responds to a celestial or geographical feature of the world—the 
body is the world. Vice versa, the world is also in the body. There 
are a sun and a moon, stars and planets, mountains and rivers, 
cities and fields, roads and passageways, palaces and towers. 

And of course, there are inhabitants. The body, as much as the 
larger universe, is ruled and lived in by the gods—the multifaceted 
manifestations of spirit, the visible and accessible aspect of the Tao 
on earth. The body as a residence of the gods, as a network of divine 
halls and palaces, as a replica of the universe is the true body of the 
Tao, the way in which the Tao is found in everyone and everywhere. 

The selections below document the varying visions of the body 
within Taoism. First, there is the medical system as represented in 
the ancient classic Huangdi neijing suwen (The Yellow Emperor’s 
Classic of Internal Medicine, Simple Questions). Going back to the 
Han dynasty in its content, the text describes the basic workings of 
the orbs and their associated body functions. It is schematic but 
gives a clear picture of the basic idea. 

Next, there is the origin myth of Pangu, whose body formed 
the world, as cited from the Yunji qiqian. This is then reversed in 
Taoist meditation instructions, telling the practitioner to visualize 
his body as the world. Two such instructions are given, one from 
the Neiguan jing (Scripture of Inner Observation) of the eighth, the 
other from the Laozi daode jing xujue (Introductory Explanations 
to Laozi’s Daode jing) of the fifth century. 



21. The Structure of the Body 


163 


Third, there is an inner-alchemical journey through the land¬ 
scape within the body, describing the roads and mountains, cities 
and palaces. It goes back to Wang Chongyang, the founder of the 
school of Complete Perfection, and is contained in the Chongyang 
zhenren jinguan yusuo jue (Master Chongyang’s Instructions on 
the Golden Gate and Jade Lock). 

Fourth, then, we have the Huangting waijing jing (Outer Radi¬ 
ance Scripture of the Yellow Court), an ancient text that was most 
influential in Highest Clarity. It outlines the inner network of the 
body and defines—with commentaries at variance—the major pal¬ 
aces and deities therein. 


21. The Structure of the Body 

The basic Taoist understanding of the body is identical with 
that of traditional Chinese medicine, which in turn is based on the 
system of the Five Agents. They and their basic associations are as 
follows: 


agent 

dir. 

color 

season 

orb 

emot. 

sense 

psych. 

wood 

east 

green 

spring 

liver 

anger 

eyes 

mat. soul 

fire 

south 

red 

summer 

heart 

joy 

tongue 

spirit 

earth 

center 

yellow 

Sept. 

spleen 

worry 

lips 

will 

metal 

west 

white 

fall 

lungs 

sadness 

nose 

spirit soul 

water 

north 

black 

winter 

kidneys 

fear 

ears 

essence 


Medical thought concentrates on the fruitful or defective inter¬ 
action between these various aspects of the body and the world. It 
prescribes medication and exercises to balance the energy flow, but 
also emphasizes the correct emergence and use of the emotions and 
the mind. 

The mind, in Chinese medical thought, is not different from 
the body, but flows through it as a subtler form of energy together 
with the energy and the blood. Emotional upheavals are therefore 
immediately linked with physical symptoms, either causing them 
or caused by them. Likewise, in Taoism the gods of the body are in 
no way different from the body as a material entity. However much 
the terminology distinguishes between spirit and matter, mind and 
body, there is no substantial difference nor strict delimitation be¬ 
tween the two. 

The selection below describes the five orbs according to the 
Huangdi neijing suwen (The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal 



164 


The Cosmic Body 


Medicine, Simple Questions) as found in DZ 1018, fasc. 649-60. 
(9.13b-19a and 10.1a-7b). The text is extant today in a Tang- 
dynasty edition, but in content goes back as far as the Han. It is 
written in dialogue form, presenting the Yellow Emperor in the 
position of the ever-learning disciple and the ancient sage Qi Bo as 
the learned medical teacher. 

For a complete, if somewhat outdated, translation of the entire 
text, see Veith 1972. On the history of the text, see Yamada 1979. 
For an introduction to the principles of Chinese medicine, see 
Kaptchuk 1983, Porkert 1983. For a rather difficult but substantial 
analysis of Chinese medical thinking, see Porkert 1974. 

For histories of Chinese medical thought and practice, see Lu 
1980, Unschuld 1985. On the interrelation of body and mind ac¬ 
cording to early documents, see Ishida 1989, Roth 1991. 


“The Five Orbs,” from Huangdi neijing suwen (The Yellow 
Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine, Simple Questions) 

9. The Six Regulations and the Manifestations of the Orbs 

“Very good,” the Yellow Emperor said. “Now, I have heard that 
the cosmic energies unite and take shape. Then they develop and 
can duly be defined in precise terms. The revolutions of heaven and 
earth, the transformations of yin and yang accordingly have their 
effect upon all living beings. Could you please explain to me the 
extent of this influence?” 

“How brilliant a question!” Qi Bo exclaimed. “Heaven is bound¬ 
less and cannot be measured; Earth is huge and without limit. 
Greatly pervaded by spirit and numinous power, their extent can¬ 
not be guessed! 

“Grass and herbs come forth in the five colors [green, red, 
yellow, white, and black]; there is nothing beyond the sight of these. 
Grass and herbs also come forth in the five flavors [sour, bitter, 
sweet, pungent, and salty]; there is nothing beyond the taste of 
these. Within this framework, humans desire different things; they 
each have what they favor most. 

“Heaven nourishes human beings with the five energies; Earth 
nourishes them with the five flavors. The five energies enter the 
nostrils and are stored in the orbs of the heart and the lungs. They 
take care that the five colors are perceived to the fullest and that 
the five sounds are heard properly. 

“The five flavors enter the mouth and are stored in the orbs of 
the intestines and the stomach. As these flavors are being stored. 



21. The Structure of the Body 


165 


they support the five energies. As these energies are well harmo¬ 
nized, they produce saliva and body fluids. As these in turn com¬ 
plete each other, spirit is brought forth spontaneously.” 

“What,” the emperor then asked, “are these orbs like?” 

“The orb of the heart,” Qi Bo informed him, “is the root of life 
and all spirit transformations. Its efflorescence is visible in the 
complexion, while its fullness is felt in the pulse of the blood. The 
heart represents the greater yang within yang and corresponds to 
the energy of summer. 

“The orb of the lungs is the root of breath and the residence of 
the material soul. Its efflorescence is visible in the body hair, while 
its fullness is felt in the skin. The lungs represent the lesser yin 
within yin and correspond to the energy of autumn. 

“The orb of the kidneys is the root of hibernation and enclo¬ 
sure. Its efflorescence is visible in the hair on the head, while its 
fullness is felt in the bones. The kidneys represent the greater yin 
within yin and correspond to the energy of winter. 



Fig. 15. The Inner Organs. Source: Xiuzhen taiji hunyuan tu. 




166 


The Cosmic Body 


“The orb of the liver is the root of all extremes and the resi¬ 
dence of the spirit soul. Its efflorescence is visible in the nails, 
while its fullness is felt in the muscles. It renews the blood and the 
energy. The taste connected with the liver is sour, and the color 
associated with it is green. The liver represents the lesser yang 
within yang and corresponds to the energy of spring. 

“The orb of the spleen and the stomach, together with those of 
the large intestine, small intestine, triple burner, and the bladder, 
is the root of all storage and the residence of the constructive 
energy. These orbs are called vessels. They can transform even the 
dregs and sediments of the food. They digest the five flavors and 
make them move along to their proper orb. Their efflorescence is 
visible in the lips and the whites of the eyes. Their fullness can be 
felt in the flesh. The flavor connected with them is sweet, and their 
color is yellow. The spleen and stomach represent the perfect yin 
and correspond to the energy of the earth. . . .” 

10. The Development and Perfection of the Five Orbs 

The orb of the heart includes the pulse. Its splendor shows in 
the complexion. It rules over the kidneys. 

The orb of the lungs includes the skin. Its splendor shows in 
the body hair. It rules over the heart. 

The orb of the liver includes the muscles. Its splendor shows in 
the nails. It rules over the lungs. 

The orb of the spleen includes the flesh. Its splendor shows in 
the lips. It rules over the liver. 

The orb of the kidneys includes the bones. Its splendor shows 
in the hair on the head. It rules over the spleen. 

If one eats too salty, the pulse hardens, tears appear, and the 
complexion changes. 

If one eats too bitter, the skin withers and the body hair falls 

out. 

If one eats too pungent, the muscles become knotty and the 
nails decay. 

If one eats too sour, the flesh first hardens, then wrinkles and 
the lips become slack. 

If one eats too sweet, the bones ache and the hair on the head 
falls out. 

These are the injuries caused by the five flavors. 



21. The Structure of the Body 


167 


The heart desires bitter food. 

The lungs desire pungent food. 

The liver desires sour food. 

The spleen desires sweet food. 

The kidneys desire salty food. 

These are the harmonies brought about by the five flavors. 

The energies of the orbs duly appear in the complexion: 

Green like grass means death. 

Yellow like oranges means death. 

Black like coal means death. 

Red like blood means death. 

White like dried bones means death. 

Thus the five colors indicate death. 

On the other hand, 

Green like the kingfisher’s wings means life. 

Red like a rooster’s comb means life. 

Yellow like the belly of a crab means life. 

White like the grease of pigs means life. 

Black like the wings of a crow means life. 

Thus five colors indicate life. 

Life in the heart appears like a robe’s vermilion lining. 

Life in the lungs appears like a robe’s pink lining. 

Life in the liver appears like a robe’s violet lining. 

Life in the stomach appears like a robe’s juniper berry lining. 
Life in the kidneys appears like a robe’s purple lining. 

Thus the five orbs indicate life. 

All colors and flavors belong to an orb: 

White belongs to the lungs; so does the pungent flavor. 

Red belongs to the heart; so does the bitter flavor. 

Green belongs to the liver; so does the sour flavor. 

Yellow belongs to the stomach; so does the sweet flavor. 
Black belongs to the kidneys; so does the salty flavor. 

Thus, 

White also corresponds to the skin. 

Red also corresponds to the pulse. 

Green also corresponds to the muscles. 

Yellow also corresponds to the flesh. 

Black also corresponds to the bones. 




168 


The Cosmic Body 


The pulse is then connected with the eyes. 

The marrow is then connected with the brain. 

The muscles are then connected with the joints. 

The blood is then connected with the heart. 

The energy is then connected with the lungs. 

The four limbs and eight joints are moving from morning to 
night. Only when people lie down to rest, the blood flows back to 
the liver. 

The liver receives the blood and one can see. 

The feet receive the blood and one can walk. 

The palms receive the blood and one can grasp things. 

The fingers receive the blood and one can lift things. 

When a person is exposed to the wind, either lying down or 
walking about, the blood will coagulate. 

When it coagulates in the skin, there is numbness. 

When it coagulates in the pulse, there is obstruction. 

When it coagulates in the feet, there are chills. 

In all three cases, the blood enters the organs and cannot 
recover its proper course. Thus there are numbness and chills. 


22. The Body as the World 

Three texts document the vision of the body as the world. The 
first is the classical myth about Pangu, from whose body the world is 
first created. The story, first found in the third-century text Sanwu liji 
(Record of the Three and Five) and in the Shuyi ji (Tales of Marvels) of 
the fifth century, is here cited after its version in the Yunji qiqian 
Yuangi Bun (Discourse on Primordial Energy; 56.1b-2a). The same 
myth is also cited with Laozi as the creator in the Xiaodao lun (Laugh¬ 
ing at the Tao), an anti-Taoist polemic of the sixth century. It docu¬ 
ments an anthropomorphic vision of the cosmos, the close 
correspondence of the natural and social world to the human body. 

The second selection is taken from the Neiguan jing (Scripture 
on Inner Observation), found in DZ 641, fasc. 342 (lb-3a). This 
Tang-dynasty set of Taoist meditation instructions documents the 
concrete application of the cosmic vision of the body. Placed in the 



22. The Body as the World 


169 


mouth of the Highest Venerable Lord, it shows how every single set 
of universal forces enters the body and keeps it alive. The transla¬ 
tion is taken from Kohn 1989b. 

Third, there is the last section of the Laozi daode jing xujue 
(Introductory Explanations to Laozi’s Daode jing). This is a 
Dunhuang manuscript listed under the numbers S. 75 and P. 2370 
and conveniently edited in Ofuchi 1979: 509. The part translated 
here is commonly dated to the fifth century. It is an early and very 
clear example of how a Taoist develops his body into the cosmos in 
meditation. Performing purifications and assembling the protector 
gods around him, he places himself in the very center of all the 
directions, symbolized by the four sacred animals and the eight 
trigrams of the Yijing. 

On Pangu and his creation, see Erkes 1942, Maspero 1981: 
340. The Neiguan jing is translated in full and discussed in Kohn 
1989b. For studies of the body in Taoism, see Schipper 1978 and 
1982, Kohn 1991a. 


“Pangu Transforms His Body,” from Yuanqi lun 

Pangu died and transformed his body. 

His breath became the wind and the clouds. 

His voice became the thunder. 

His left eye was the sun. 

His right eye was the moon. 

His four limbs changed to be the four compass points. 

His five limbs became the five sacred mountains. 

His blood and body fluids turned into streams and rivers. 

His muscles and sinews became solid earth. 

His flesh became arable land. 

His hair turned into stars. 

His body hair turned into grass and trees. 

His teeth and bones were transformed into gold and minerals. 
His marrow changed into pearls and jade. 

His sweat was the rain and the moisture of the land. 

The germs in his body were carried off by the wind. 

They became the mass of the people. 

Neiguan jing (Scripture on Inner Observation) 

[lb] The Venerable Lord said: 

Heaven and earth mingle their essences; yin and yang engage 
in interchange. Thus the myriad beings come to life, each receiving 




Fig. 16. Pangu, the Creator. Source: Sancai tuhui. 






22. The Body as the World 


171 


a particular life: yet all are alike in that they have a share in the 
life-giving Tao. 

When father and mother unite in harmony, man receives life. 

In the first month, essence and blood coagulate in the womb. 

In the second month, the embryo begins to take shape. 

In the third month, the yang spirit arouses the three spirit 
souls to come to life. 

In the fourth month, the yin energy settles the seven 
material souls as guardians of the body. 

In the fifth month, the five agents are distributed to the five 
orbs to keep their spirit at peace. 

In the sixth month, the six pitches are set up in the six 
intestines nourishing the vital energy. 

In the seventh month, the seven essential stars open the body 
orifices to let the light in. 

In the eighth month, the eight luminants descend with their 
true vital energy. 

In the ninth month, the various palaces and chambers are 
properly arranged to keep the essence safe. 

In the tenth month, the energy is strong enough to complete 
the image. 

People’s feeding on primordial harmony is never interrupted. 
The Lord Emperor of the Great One resides in the head. He is 
called the Lord of the Niwan Palace. He governs the host of spirits. 
What makes life shine forth and lets man know of the spirits is his 
spirit soul. 

[2a] Siming, the Ruler of Fates, resides in the heart. He regu¬ 
lates the prime energies of life. Wuying occupies his left, from 
where he regulates the three spirit souls. Baiyuan occupies the 
right, from where he regulates the seven material souls. Taohai 
resides in the navel, where he preserves the root of the essence. 

What makes the various joints of the body function together 
are the hundred manifestations of the spirit of life. As it pervades 
the whole of the body, spirit is not empty. When primordial energy 
enters through the nose and reaches the niwan in the center of the 
head, the spirit light radiates and the body is stable and at peace. 
For all movement and rest, however, it fully depends on the mind. 
This is how life first begins. 

When you now observe yourself in detail and with care, beware 
of the mind. As the ruler of the self it can prohibit and control 



172 


The Cosmic Body 


everything. It is responsible for the propriety of the body spirits. 
The mind is the spirit. Its changes and transformations cannot be 
fathomed. It does not have a fixed shape. 

In the five orbs, the following spirit manifestations reside: 

The spirit soul in the liver; 
the material soul in the lungs; 
the essence in the kidneys; 
the intention in the spleen; 
the spirit in the heart. 

Their appellations vary in accordance with their respective po¬ 
sitions. The heart belongs to the agent fire. Fire is the essence of 
the south and of greater yang. Above it is governed by the planet 
Mars; below it corresponds to the heart. [2b] Its color is red and it 
consists of three valves that resemble a lotus leaf. As the light of 
pure spirit is rooted there, it is named accordingly. 

Spirit is neither black nor white, neither red nor yellow, nei¬ 
ther big nor small, neither short nor long, neither crooked nor 
straight, neither soft nor hard, neither thick nor thin, neither round 
nor square. It goes on changing and transforming without mea¬ 
sure, merges with yin and yang, greatly encompasses heaven and 
earth, subtly enters the tiniest blade of grass. 

Controlled it is straightforward; let loose it goes mad. Purity 
and tranquility make it live; defilements and nervousness cause it 
to perish. When shining it can illuminate the eight ends of the 
universe. When darkened it will go wrong even in one single direc¬ 
tion. You need only keep it empty and still, then life and the Tao 
will spontaneously be permanent. Always preserve an attitude of 
non-action, and the self will prosper. 

Spirit is shapeless; thus it cannot be named. All good and bad 
fortune, all success and failure only come from the spirit. Thus the 
sage will always preserve a straightforward relation to the ruler 
and the government, to the established rewards and punishments, 
and to the laws and regulations of the administration. He sets an 
example for others. The reason why people find it hard to submit to 
rules and regulations is found in their minds. When the mind is 
pure and calm, all the many problems of misfortune don’t arise. 

All ups and downs, life and death, all vicissitudes and evils 
arise from the mind. [3a] All foolishness and delusion, love and 
hate, all accepting and rejecting, coming and going, all defilements 
and attachments, as well as all entanglement and bondage arise 



22. The Body as the World 


173 


gradually from becoming involved in things. Madly turning hither 
and thither, tied up and fettered, one is unable to get free. Thus 
one is bound for peril and destruction. 

Oxen and horses when led properly can easily wade through 
the marsh. When let loose, however, they will sink in deeper and 
deeper and can never get out again by themselves. So they have to 
die. People are just like this: when first born their original spirit is 
pure and tranquil, profound and unadulterated. But then people 
gradually take in shaped objects. Those will in due course defile the 
six senses: 

The eyes will covet color. 

The ears will be obstructed by sound. 

The mouth will be addicted to flavors. 

The nose will always take in smells. 

The mind will be intent on refusing and coveting. 

The body will desire to be slimmer or fatter. 

From all these ups and downs of life no one is able to wake up 
by himself Thus the sages with compassionate consideration estab¬ 
lished the doctrine to teach people to reform. They made them use 
inner observation of the self and body in order to purify the mind. 


Laozi daodejing xujue (Introductory Explanations to Laozi’s 
Daodejing) 

These are the secret instructions of the Highest Lord. 

First burn incense and straighten your robes, greet the ten 
directions with three bows each. Concentrate your mind inside and 
visualize Master Yin and the Master on the River, as well as Laozi, 
the Great Teacher of the Law. 

Then open the text and recite the following in your mind: 

Mysterious, again mysterious, the origin of Tao, 

Above, virtue incorporates chaos and the prime. 

Heaven’s truth is wonderful, yet how far, alas! 

Coming closer, now there is the Great Lord of Niwan. 

In my room, the seven jewels come together. 

Doors and windows open of themselves. 

Utter in my purity, I strive for deeper truth. 

Riding on bright light, I ascend the purple sky. 



174 


The Cosmic Body 


Sun and moon shine to my right and left, 

I go to the immortals, find eternal life. 

All seven ancestors rise, are reborn in heaven. 

The world, how true, is the gate to virtue and to Tao. 

Finish this mental recitation, then clap your teeth and swallow 
the saliva thirty-six times each. Visualize the green dragon to your 
left, the white tiger to your right, the red bird in front of you, and 
the dark warrior at your back. 

Your feet stand between the eight trigrams; the divine turtle 
and the thirty-six masters bow to you. In front of you, you see the 
seventeen stars; your five inner orbs give forth the five energies; a 
network pattern streams across your body. 

On three sides you are joined by an attendant, each having a 
retinue of a thousand carriages and ten thousand horsemen. Eight 
thousand jade maidens and jade lads of heaven and earth stand 
guard for you. 

Then repeat the formula, this time aloud, and begin to recite 
the five thousand words of the scripture. Conclude by three times 
clapping your teeth and swallowing the saliva. 


23. The World in the Body 

Just as the body is the world, so also is the world in the body. 
Not only is there another sun and moon, are there palaces and 
towers, mountains and rivers, but the active practitioner can and 
should also wander among them, make their acquaintance, and 
feel at home in himself as the universe. 

The Chongyang zhenren jinguan yusuo jue (Master Chongyang’s 
Instructions on the Golden Gate and Jade Lock) is a text of Com¬ 
plete Perfection Taoism found in DZ 1156, fasc. 796. Written in a 
question-and-answer pattern, it consists of practical instructions 
Wang Chongyang, the founder of Complete Perfection in the twelfth 
century, gives to his disciples. 

It is not a systematic or particularly well-organized text but 
presents a collection of methods quite parallel to each other. Some 
specify cures for diseases, others deal with particular situations 
likely to be encountered by practitioners, others again are medi¬ 
tation instructions, especially of inner alchemy. However, since 
the text seems to go back to Wang Chongyang’s immediate envi¬ 
ronment, it provides a useful window to the concerns and prac- 



23. The World in the Body 


175 


tices of Complete Perfection Taoists. Its Buddhist influence is 
obvious. 

The section translated below (18a-20a) describes a spiritual 
and mediational journey through the body. The body appears as 
an inner landscape, with rivers and mountains, towers and pal¬ 
aces, guards and gods, witches and demons. As the meditator trav¬ 
els along its mysterious routes, he or she is instructed to recognize 
the various physical features in their symbolic and spiritual 
dimensions. 

For a discussion of the text, see Tsui 1991: 41-48 (including 
translations of parts other than the section chosen here). For more 
on the world in the body, see Rousselle 1933, Schipper 1982. 


Chongyang zhenren jinguan yusuo jue (Master Chongyang’s 
Instructions on the Golden Gate and Jade Lock) 

[18a] For those who practice this cultivation [of the Tao], there 
is the great road of the teaching without and the straight route 
within. It is just that ordinary people do not even know this is 
there. 

As you move ahead on the inner route for three miles, you will 
first come to three great torrents. They are quite bottomless. How 
do they relate to you, past and future? 

Let me explain. These three great torrents are the Three Teach¬ 
ings, the Three Vehicles. With their help one can be free from the 
Three Forms of Death, acquire the Three Treasures, and go beyond 
the Three Worlds. 

As you then travel further, after another three miles, you will 
come to six deep ditches. They are so wide that you cannot proceed 
beyond them. What gateways do they represent? 

Let me explain. These six ditches are the six bodhisattva vir¬ 
tues [paramitas] with their myriad practices. They help to calm 
and purify the six senses, behead the six robbers [of sensual indul¬ 
gence], control the six forms of sexual attraction, and establish the 
six stages [toward enlightenment]. 

Then again you move on for yet another three miles. You will 
see three freshly built rafts. These are the precious rafts of purity. 
They are near the Seven Forests, ready to transport you away from 
the dead. 

[18b] [Traveling now by raft], another three miles further on, 
you will then come to a garden. This is known as the Fruitbearing 
Garden. It is guarded by an old man. Anyone with karma of the 



176 


The Cosmic Body 


past who wants to pass has first to lay it all down. You may only go 
on empty-handed. 

Let us say you manage to move past the garden. Another three 
miles further on your way, you notice an enormous tree. A golden 
ox is tethered to it. At this point on the bank of the river, several 
splendid terraces appear: 

Men’s Yellow Gold Terrace, 

Women’s Phoenix Terrace, 

Spirit Immortals Fishing Terrace, 

Thousand-Flowers of Happiness Terrace. 

Be careful and keep your eyes on them. If you don’t gaze at 
them all the time, you will be attracted by three women near the 
mouth of the river. Once you move across the river mouth toward 
them, they will turn into evil witches. So stick to your boat and see 
that you get past this place as fast as possible. 

Another three miles further on, there is a huge mountain. On 
the eastern slope of this mountain is a gray ox. This represents the 
energy of the Venerable Lord. On the western slope of the moun¬ 
tain, you can see a white ram. This is the energy of the sage 
Confucius. Then again, on the slope straight to the south, there is a 
yellow ram. This is the energy of the Golden Immortal of Great 
Awakening [the Buddha]. 

These three beasts will lead you into the mountain—the moun¬ 
tain is thus the assembled combination of sacred Threefold Yang. 
[19a] Once inside, there is a walled city called Northtown. It has 
four gates, each equipped with a wooden plaque with an inscrip¬ 
tion. The inscriptions read: 

On the eastern gate, “Gate of Opening Radiance,” 
on the western gate, “Gate of Eternal Life,” 
on the southern gate, “Gate of Golden Radiance,” 
on the northern gate, “Gate of the Vast Waters.” 

These gates are the eyes, ears, nose, and mouth. 

As you enter through any of these four gates, you will see four 
grottoes: 

The Grotto of Celestial Happiness, 
the Grotto of the White Clouds, 
the Grotto of Bamboo Country, 
the Grotto of Eternal Life. 






Fig. 17. The World in the Body. Source: Neijing tu. 






178 


The Cosmic Body 


As you enter further into these four grottoes, you will see four 
temples: 

The Temple of Nonbeing and Purity, 
the Temple of Mystery and Emptiness, 
the Temple of the Bamboo Grotto, 
the Temple of [missing]. 

These four temples represent the four karmic fruits [stages of 
enlightenment]: 

stream-enterer, 

once-returner, 

non-returner, 

arhat. 

Such are the four temples. Resident immortals preside over them. 

Move further ahead and you will notice five monasteries: 

The Monastery of Fame, 
the Monastery of Healing, 
the Monastery of Peace, 
the Monastery of Suchness, 
the Monastery of Tusita Heaven. 

In these five monasteries, there are five palaces: 

The Twin Maiden Palace is the eyes; 
the Great Dragon Palace is the mouth; 
the Upper White Palace is the nose; 
the Water Crystal Palace is the ears; 
the Heavenly Balance Palace is the heart. 

[19b] In their center is a high tower connecting the upper and 
the lower levels of the body through twelve stages of respiration. 
This tower is called the twelve-storied tower. 

Each storey is also called a tower. They are: 

The Tower of the Central Palace, 

the Tower of the Moon Palace, 

the Tower of the Heavenly Immortals, 



23. The World in the Body 


179 


the Tower of Collected Treasure, 
the Tower of the Sagely Well, 
the Tower of the Energy of the Law, 
the Tower of Wondrous Sounds, 
the Tower of Realizing the Tao, 
the Tower of Highest Absorption, 
the Tower of Luminous Yang, 
the Tower of Bell and Drum, 
the Tower of the Two Sages. 

Each tower-level has its special time on the first day of the 
twelve months in every year. Thus in the human body there are 
towers corresponding to the twelve months. These towers are more¬ 
over related to the twelve divisions of the scriptures and the twelve 
earthly branches of the calendar. They divide equally among the 
four sides. 

Also, there you can see the Nine Palaces. These represent the 
nine orifices of the human body. They are: 

The Palace of Wind and Thunder and 

the Palace of the Twin Forests in the east; 

the Palace of Purple Tenuity and 

the Palace of Shakyamuni in the south; 

the Palace of the Holy Mother and 

the Palace of the Gracious Arhat in the west; 

the Palace of Brahma and 

the Palace of Water Crystal in the north; 

the Palace of Peace in the center. 

Such are the Nine Palaces. They are arranged just as the Nine 
Provinces on earth. 

Then again, there are smaller districts which were originally 
denoted as the ten continents. These are the following ten countries: 

The country of Patriarch Jiao, 

the country of Shakyamuni, 

the country of Blossoming Flowers [20a], 

the country of the Deer King, 

the country of Golden Colors, 

the country of Flowing Glass, 

the country of Kapilavastu, 



180 


The Cosmic Body 


the country of Southern Depth, 

the country of India, 

the country of Twofold Yang. 

These ten countries correspond to the ten regions on earth. In 
each of these regions there is one huge mountain that presides over 
it. 

The human body truly is an amazing thing. It works hard to 
cure all the tough diseases which lie in wait to harm the human 
life. 


Also, there are four large seas in the body: 

The saliva is the Eastern Sea; 
the blood is the Southern Sea; 
the marrow is the Western Sea; 
the energy is the Northern Sea. 

Then again there are five great lakes: 

The body at large is the Grotto Garden Lake; 
the essence is the King’s Lake; 
the sweet saliva is the Cream Lake; 
the heart is the Mysterious Lake; 
the small intestine is the River Lake. 

All these stand in close correspondence to the sun and the 
moon, the stars and the planets. 

Then there are the three dissolutions. They are the weakening 
of the blood, energy, and essence. These three dissolutions make 
mountains tumble, oceans dry up, and the earth split open. 

To prevent this, on the first day of each month at noontime sit 
and visualize the body. There is no better practice than this to gain 
merit. 

Men thus refine their bodies and become like lads. 

Women thus refine their bodies and become like girls. 

As the scriptures say: 

“Body and spirit are equally wondrous; 

Joined in the Tao, they find their perfection.” 

This is just it. 



24. The Gods Within 


181 


24. The Gods Within 

Another form in which the body appears is as the residence of 
the gods and spirits. They vitalize the human body through their 
presence, residing in the body as they do in the stars, in palaces 
and halls, towers and terraces. Rather than moving on through the 
inner landscape, meditation here means the focusing of attention 
on one or the other of these gods. The more one keeps one’s concen¬ 
tration fixed, the less the gods will be inclined to leave. And when 
the gods don’t leave, the body cannot die. 

The text presented here, the Huang ting waijing jing (The 
Outer Radiance Scripture of the Yellow Court) is the oldest scrip¬ 
ture in an entire group of texts called “Yellow Court Scriptures.” It 
was compiled approximately in the third century and gives a first 
inkling of the powerful divine occupancy of the human body and its 
parallel structure to the stars. 

The system becomes central in Highest Clarity Taoism. Here 
the most important “Yellow Court” document is the Huang ting 
neijing jing or “Inner Radiance Scripture of the Yellow Court.” 
Longer and more elaborate, this text makes much use of the ear¬ 
lier, “Outer,” version. It is, however, only slightly less confusing. 

The text here is taken from the Song-dynasty collection Xiuzhen 
shishu (Ten Books on the Cultivation of Perfection) in DZ 263, fasc. 
122-131 (58.1a-4b). The second, alternative commentary is taken 
from the edition in the Yunji qiqian (12.28b-31b). As the variations 
show, there is no one interpretation to the symbolic and esoteric 
nomenclature of bodily organs and functions. 

For a convenient edition and index of both scriptures, see 
Schipper 1975a. A critical discussion of the texts and their relation¬ 
ship is contained in Robinet 1984. 

On Taoist meditation after the “Yellow Court,” see Robinet 
1979. For a preliminary analysis of the gods and system in the 
“Inner Radiance Scripture,” see Homann 1971. 


Huang ting waijing jing (The Outer Radiance Scripture of 
the Yellow Court) 

Laozi, living in seclusion, composed the seven-word text. 

Laozi was born before heaven and earth; he has always been 
there since heaven and earth came to be. He has thirty-six titles 
and seventy-two names. He took refuge in the womb of Mother Li 
and was born after eighty-one years. 



182 


The Cosmic Body 


He composed the Yellow Court Scripture to transmit his teaching to 
later generations. Appearing in countless transformations, he com¬ 
pleted his task. Always, he naturally found someone who would kneel 
before him to receive the instructions. If nobody had been found, 
Laozi would not have spoken even for ten thousand generations. 

* 

Laozi is the essential soul of heaven, the lord of nature. He brought 
forth the divine immortals, who live on and on for ten thousand 
generations. He composed the seven-word text to transmit his 
teaching to posterity. 

Explaining clearly the human body and its relation to the gods. 

Laozi rests quietly in so-being, yet at the same time floats about 
the eight ends of the universe. [Like the Tao] he is vague and 
obscure and cannot be fathomed. Continuously changing on and 
on, he holds the sacred talismans, controls the registers of life and 
death, and orders about the host of the gods. 

The Tao does not have two families—to the end it always sup¬ 
ports its servants. The Tao does not have two kin-groups— invari¬ 
ably it always remains with the good. 

* 

The lord says that all is originally one continuous process. The 
whole body, from head to feet, can be brought to life. It is a single 
network and, as a whole, can be at peace. The Tao is not twofold. 
Whoever practices it is wise. 

Above there is the Yellow Court; below, the Primordial Pass. 

The Yellow Court is in the head. It encompasses three palaces 
known as the Hall of Light, the Grotto Chamber, and the Cinna¬ 
bar Field. Enter between the eyebrows toward the back of the 
head. After one inch, there is the Hall of Light; after two inches, 
there is the Grotto Chamber; after three inches, there is the Cin¬ 
nabar Field. These three constitute the Upper Prime. 

The Yellow Court is paired with the Grotto Chamber. Together 
they bring forth an infant god, who is their resident perfected. 
Always visualize him! Be careful not to lose the image. 

The infant turns into a Perfected in the Hall of Light. Then he 
is called Master Cinnabar. Here, to know the perfected means to 
concentrate on the Hall of Light as its residence. 

Practice breathing and gymnastics, close your eyes and turn 
your vision inward, calm your mind and concentrate your thoughts. 



24. The Gods Within 


183 


Merge with chaos in the limitless! Let essence revert upward and 
circulate in the Niwan [Cinnabar Field], This will bring about the 
Perfected Master Cinnabar. 

In the Hall of Light, the infant and the Master are like lord and 
minister. Further behind, in the Grotto Chamber, they are like 
father and mother. In the Cinnabar Field, they are like husband 
and wife. 

According to another explanation, the Yellow Court is the spleen. 
It is located one inch above the Great Storehouse [stomach] in the 
abdomen, about three inches above the navel. The spleen is the 
seat of the God of the Center, the Yellow Venerable Lord. He rules 
from here. 

The Primordial Pass is three inches below the navel. The Gate 
of Primordial Yang is suspended before it. When essence here is 
completely clear, it reflects the entire body. Never slacken in your 
practice of this Tao. 


The Yellow Court is the eyes. The father and mother of the Tao 
both nourish the immortal embryo. On the left, there is the 
Numinous Yang, also known as Splendor Brightness. On the right, 
there is Great Yin, also known as Mystery Radiance. All three 
together build the right virtue; they support each other as they 
develop. 

Behind there are the Dark Towers; in front, the Gate of Life. 

The Dark Towers are the kidneys. Like overturned cups standing 
on their rims, they are three inches off the navel, big on top and 
small below. They contain another universe, with their own sun 
and moon. The Gate of Life is below the navel. 

The Dark Towers are the kidneys. They are related to the eyes 
through the energy circuits. The Gate of Life is the navel. It is 
about three inches in size. When the sun rises and the moon sets, 
yin and yang are balanced. Breathe the primordial breath in and 
out to nourish the numinous root. 

Breathe in and out and through the stove; thus energy enters the 
Cinnabar Field. 

To breathe out means to expel the breath; to breathe in means to 
draw it in. The stove is the nose. 



184 


The Cosmic Body 


This is the essential method to expel the old and draw in the 
new. The vital energy then enters between the eyebrows and after 
three inches reaches the Cinnabar Field in the head. Thus one 
draws in the breath through the nose and enters it into the Cin¬ 
nabar Field. 


* 

Breathing out is expelling; breathing in is drawing in. Through 
respiration the primordial breath can enter the Cinnabar Field. 
The Cinnabar Field is three inches below the navel, the gate of 
yin and yang. This is where ordinary people produce offspring. 
Taoists use it to preserve their lives. 

The clear fluid in the Jade Pond waters the Numinous Root. 

“Clear fluid in the Jade Pond” refers to the mouth where the 
saliva assembles. The Numinous Root is the tongue. One should 
always keep the teeth together, rinse with saliva, and accumulate 
it to water the tongue. 


* 

The mouth is the Jade Pond, the Palace of Great Harmony. The 
saliva is the clear fluid, always beautiful and fresh. Saliva col¬ 
lected in the throat makes the sound of thunder and lightning. 
The tongue is the Numinous Root. Always keep it well watered. 

All can practice this, all can live long. 

Practice this day morning and night without slackening. Then you 
can attain long life. 


* 

By practicing this day and night, one will subdue the deadly forces, 
kill the three worms, and expel all evil demons. Body and flesh 
will blossom; the true energy will return. When all evils have lost 
their power, one will live long and radiate a brilliance. 

The gods of the Yellow Court wear red robes. 

Concentrate and visualize mother and child in the spleen. See 
how they enter the spleen from the stomach, wearing red. 



24. The Gods Within 


185 


* 

The tiny pupils in the eyes are a couple. The right is the king, the 
left is the queen. Wearing red garments, they proceed to a ban¬ 
quet in the palace at the rear of the Cinnabar Field. Visualize 
them morning and night, never relax your effort! 

The Pass Gate has a strong lock; keep its doors in place. 

The gate of the lower Cinnabar Field has to be locked. Don’t open 
it wantonly. 


* 

Close your eyes and look inside. There is nothing that is not seen. 
Close your mouth and curl your tongue. This is feeding on the 
mother. Keep the jade flower in the throat. You will never suffer 
any trouble. All this is due to energy. The teeth are the doors, the 
tongue is the lock that keeps them in place. 

The Dark Towers communicate with loftiness and eminence above. 

The kidneys are located at the gate of the Dark Towers, i.e., the 
building of the Earth Administration. They are the storehouse of 
vital energy. Above they are connected with the ears. The ears are 
on the sides of the head, they are lofty and eminent. 

* 

The Tao knows of three primordial points where compassionate 
intention arises. The lower of these is the steadiness of the myste¬ 
rious spring in the Dark Towers [testicles]. The middle one is the 
pair of Dark Towers of the kidneys. The upper one is the pair of 
Dark Towers of the ears. The latter watch over the Golden Gate 
and the Jade Entrance. They also communicate with heaven, in 
the same way as Lady Jiao plays the zither and the flute, holding 
and suppressing the notes gong and shang. 

In the Cinnabar Field, essence and energy are subtle. 

The Cinnabar Field is located three inches beneath the navel. It is 
about three square inches in size. Its energy is subtle and won¬ 
drous. Visualize it, and it is there; forget about it, and it is gone. It 
changes and disappears. Thus we say it is subtle. 



186 


The Cosmic Body 


* 

The Cinnabar Field is the first chamber, opposite the Hall of Light. 
Its essence and energy are subtle and can hardly be distinguished. 
Thus we say it is subtle. 

The Jade Pond with its clear fluid develops opulence. 

The Jade Pond is the mouth. The clear fluid is the saliva as it 
accumulates there. “Develops opulence” means that saliva is col¬ 
lected at the root of the tongue like a pond. Thus it is opulent. 

* 

In the mouth, there is saliva. It rests and moves. Only when col¬ 
lected on the tongue, in its white kind, is it rich and greasy like fat. 
Rinse with it and maintain it fresh: This is the way to long life. 

The Numinous Root is stiff and strong—grow old but never weak. 

The Numinous Root is the tongue. Always keep it rolled up and 
the teeth strongly together. During the practice never let the tongue 
get tired or dry. Always visualize its god, and you will live long 
but never grow weak. 


* 

The Numinous Root is the tongue. It governs the four directions 
and harmonizes the five flavors. It expels stench and invites fra¬ 
grance. Bite the teeth together and preserve your energy; thus 
you can live by swallowing saliva. 

In the Middle Pond, a deity resides, clad in red. 

Constantly visualize the infant in the heart. He is clad in red 
garments, finely ornamented, and resides in the middle Cinnabar 
Field. All exhaustion and bad fortune, all sloth and agitation, 
through him are made to go. 


* 

Ruojing in the throat is the God of the Prime. Beneath middle 
harmony, the towers show the partition of the way. With his red¬ 
dish glowing dress, this god becomes a friend. 



24. The Gods Within 


187 


Three inches below the Field is where the gods reside. 

This refers to the spleen, situated in the abdomen. Beneath the 
Upper Burner is the Numinous Root of the navel. This is where 
the gods reside. 


The palace of the Hall of Light is three square inches in size. The 
gods reside in the very center of the eye. The eyebrows are their 
flowery canopies; the five colors are their couches. 

Inside and outside firmly kept apart—lock it twice. 

Close in essence and guard it well. Never let it leak out wantonly. 

To close it in properly use the Golden Tower and the Jade Lock. 

* 

Energy within should go out; energy without should come in. This 
process takes place by way of the three passes. When both kinds 
of energy are kept properly separate, the Tao of heaven is in its 
natural order. 

The interior of the Spirit Stove should be kept in order. 

The Spirit Stove is the nose. There are little hairs inside, which 
have to be kept in order by removing them periodically. By then 
breathing carefully through the nose you can expel all evil forces. 

* 

This teaches to pull out the hairs in the nose. The nose guaran¬ 
tees the free passage of the divine Tao; thus it is a stove or resi¬ 
dence. Practice diligently day and night; never relax your efforts! 

The breath pipe suspended in the chest contains the Talisman of 
Essence. 

The lower part of the tongue is the Talisman of Essence. The 
throat is the breath pipe. Energy and essence travel up and down 
through it. It is also where the Upper Prime harmonizes energy to 
be subtle and wondrous. It is the road on which the perfected 
travel up and down. 



188 


The Cosmic Body 


The center of the throat is the part that rises above the chest. 
Primordial energy travels up and down through this area. Thus it 
is called the Talisman of Essence. 

Strive to steady your essence to keep naturally whole. 

Close in your energy and revert your essence upward to preserve 
yourself intact. Never let it leak out wantonly. Revert the essence 
to nourish the brain—this is the Tao of no-death. 

* 

Keep energy together and never let it go. 


In the residence is a personage always clad in pink. 

Continuously visualize the god in the heart with his pink cinna¬ 
bar robe. He moves in and out. Doing this, you will be free from 
disaster and expel all evil. 


* 

The face is the inch residence, the office of the Perfected is in its 
center. His robes are vermilion or red; he radiates a fiery red 
brilliance with a pink halo. 

When you can see him, you will be sick no more. 

With all your might, concentrate on the god in the heart and 
visualize him without interruption. When you can always see the 
infant within, you will be free from all sickness and disease. 

* 


This serves to admonish people to realize the profundity of the 
truth of the Tao. By merit of seeing this god, you will be free from 
sickness. 



Part Three 


ETERNAL VISION 



Chapter Seven 


THE ONE 


To fully realize the cosmic qualities of one’s entire self, body 
and mind, Taoists employ three different forms of meditation. While 
these three tend to go together in actual practice and always re¬ 
main closely linked to both physical practices and the goal of im¬ 
mortality, they are well separated terminologically in the tradition 
itself and can also be distinguished in terms of contemporary phe¬ 
nomenology. 

The three forms are concentrative meditation, insight medita¬ 
tion, and ecstatic excursions, presented below under the headings 
“The One,” “Insight Practice,” and “Ecstatic Excursions.” Concen¬ 
tration comes first. It is a basic exercise in fixation of mind, the 
focusing of attention on one single spot, the cultivation of one- 
pointedness. The classical expression is “guarding the One.” Be¬ 
sides simply “to concentrate,” this also means to secure the presence 
of the gods within the body. Just as concentration in meditation 
practice in general is the foundation for contemplation or higher 
spiritual exercises, so the rooting of the gods in Taoism leads to 
insight and ecstatic journeys to the otherworld. 

Insight is a concept borrowed from Buddhism and coupled 
closely with the notion of mindfulness. Here the attention is not 
fixed in one single spot but kept moving, either within the body or 
in the outside world. Practitioners notice, literally “observe,” self 
and others and evaluate them in a particular new way, applying 
the worldview of the Tao to their lives and being. They gain new 
insights by adapting their conscious understanding of all to the 
point of view of the Tao. 

Ecstatic excursions are travels to the realms of the otherworld 
that go back originally to the journeys of shamans. Leaving the 
physical body behind, the soul of the meditator surges up and 
beyond, meeting divine powers and spirits of the stars. Through 


191 



192 


The One 


traversing the far reaches of the universe, by becoming lighter and 
softer as they adapt to celestial modes, Taoists become one with the 
Tao in its own plane. 

Concentrative meditation, the first of the three, centers around 
the One. The One in Taoist cosmology signifies the state of cre¬ 
ation, the empty circle at the beginning of all, the point of the 
Great Ultimate, when the Tao is no longer utterly formless and 
beyond and yet has not yet begun to differentiate into the creation. 
It is like the Tao—sometimes described as coming from it, some¬ 
times as its origin. 

This original form of oneness, of cosmic unity at the beginning 
of all, is known as the Great One. The Great One is a formless 
omnipresent principle that adepts should focus on; it is the primor¬ 
dial vital energy iyuanqi) underlying all; it is the one single ele¬ 
ment that makes beings be what they are. 

While this original unity is not manifest in the body but ap¬ 
pears as an abstraction, as a formless state of fixed unity, it be¬ 
comes attainable as the Three Ones or Three-in-One. These are 
three original energies of the Tao, still primordial yet already lean¬ 
ing more toward creation and existence. They are yin and yang and 
the harmony between the two; they are separate and yet one, ac¬ 
cessible in the body as distinct energies (essence, spirit, and en¬ 
ergy), as energy centers (the Cinnabar Fields), and as gods (the 
Lords Three Ones), and yet still part of the original Tao. 

Realizing the One therefore means recovering the original unity 
of the Tao, the state of creation, the pure power of life. The One 
appears in the body in different forms. Historically the meditation 
developed from visualizations of the colored energies of the five 
orbs, through the identification of the True One with the center of 
reproductive energies and original power, to the Three Ones in 
Highest Clarity. By the late Tang, in adaptation of Mahayana think¬ 
ing, the One has become identified with all. 

The four texts selected below represent this historical develop¬ 
ment. First, there is the Taiping jing shengjun bizhi (Secret In¬ 
structions of the Holy Lord on the Scripture of Great Peace), a 
Tang-dynasty redaction of meditation methods according to the 
Taiping jing. Since the latter was originally a Han document, the 
text contains descriptions of ancient methods. 

Then there is the Baopuzi (Book of the Master Who Embraces 
Simplicity), a fourth-century tract on alchemical ways to immortal¬ 
ity that also includes meditation instructions on visualizing the 
True One. Third, the Jinque dijun sanyuan zhenyi jing (Scripture 



25. Lights in the Body 


193 


of the Three Primordial Realized Ones by the Lord Goldtower) 
belongs to the school of Highest Clarity. It specifies ways and means 
to visualize and fixate the Three Ones in the body. 

Finally, the Xuanzhu xinjing zhu (Mysterious Pearly Mirror of 
the Mind) of the late Tang contains two poems on the One with 
commentary. It gives expression to the Mahayana-inspired vision of 
the One as all. 


25. Lights in the Body 

The earliest form of Taoist meditation, as far as the texts docu¬ 
ment it, appeared in the Han dynasty and was based on the medi¬ 
cal analysis of the body. It was the visualization of lights of different 
colors within different parts of the body, matching the energies of 
the agents with their directions and their storage place within. 
This practice is later known as the “ingestion of the five sprouts,” 
in reference to the original energy of the five directions, and plays a 
continued part in Highest Clarity. 

It is described in a rather ancient form in the first few pages 
(la-3b) of the Taiping jing shengjun bizhi (Secret Instructions of the 
Holy Lord on the Scripture of Great Peace), a short collection of 
meditation methods of the Taiping jing (Scripture of Great Peace) 
found in DZ 1102, fasc. 755. The Taiping jing is the earliest revealed 
Taoist scripture known from the literature. A first version of the text 
was presented to Emperor Cheng of the Former Han in 32 b.c.e. 

Revealed by a sage known as Chijingzi or Master of Red Es¬ 
sence, this early document was a prognostic text, revealing the 
impending disaster of the world and the ways in which humanity 
could avoid it. It appeared at a time when the Han dynasty was 
failing and apocryphal scriptures and prognostications of all kinds 
swept the country. Around the same time, the first mass religious 
movement is mentioned in the histories, a salvational craze cen¬ 
tered around the Queen Mother of the West. 

No organization of any historical moment evolved from it, how¬ 
ever, until another Taiping jing appeared in 140 c.e. This text, a 
long scripture of first 50, later 170 scrolls, predicted the end of the 
world and beginning of a new golden age for the year 184, the next 
first year of the sixty-year cycle of the traditional Chinese calendar. 
At this time, so the prediction said, a person clad in yellow would 
become emperor and the realm of Great Peace, universal harmony 
and cosmic openness, would be inaugurated. 



194 


The One 


Inspired by this prophesy, the followers of the scripture grew 
into a sizable movement in the eastern province of Qi (modern 
Shandong). In practice and outlook they were approximately paral¬ 
lel to the Celestial Masters under Zhang Daoling in southwestern 
Shu (modern Sichuan). 

Unlike the Celestial Masters, however, the Great Peace follow¬ 
ers took the predictions to refer to them personally and, in 184, 
rose in rebellion. Since they wore yellow kerchiefs to fulfill the 
prediction, they have become known as the Yellow Turbans. Their 
rebellion lasted over a decade and was bloodily put down in the 
end. It was the beginning of the end of the Han dynasty. 

The Taiping jing, which inspired all this bloodshed, was ruth¬ 
lessly destroyed at the time and only reassembled in the sixth 
century from surviving fragments and the fruitful imagination of 
later writers. Even the version now extant is not complete. Still, 
what remains can, at least in certain parts, be taken as an indica¬ 
tion of the earliest form of organized Taoism in China. 

On the history and editions of the Taiping jing, see Kandel 
1979, Mansvelt-Beck 1980, Petersen 1989, 1990. On the worldview 
expressed in the scripture, see Kaltenmark 1979, Hendrischke 1991, 
Petersen 1990a. For an account of the beliefs, practices, and rebel¬ 
lion of the Yellow Turbans, see Levy 1956, Michaud 1958. On the 
ingestion of the five sprouts, see Robinet 1979 and 1989. 


Taiping jing shengjun bizhi (Secret Instructions of the Holy 
Lord on the Scripture of Great Peace) 

[la] The Holy Lord said: 

The three energies together are unified in the One. There is 
essence, there is spirit, and there is energy. These three are origi¬ 
nally one. They are founded in heaven and earth and form the root 
of all human energy. Human beings receive spirit from heaven, 
essence from earth, and energy from the middle harmony of heaven 
and earth. Joined together they are the One. Thus spirit moves by 
riding along on energy, while essence resides in the middle between 
them. The three support each other and form an integrated whole. 

To pursue long life you must love energy, venerate spirit, and 
value essence. Human beings originally come from the energy of 
primordial chaos. This energy brings forth essence, which in turn 
gives birth to spirit. Spirit brings forth light. People are also based 
on the energy of yin and yang. As this energy revolves it brings 
forth essence. Essence in turn revolves and becomes spirit. Spirit 
revolves and light is born. 





25. Lights in the Body 


195 


To pursue long life you must guard energy and harmonize 
spirit and essence. Never let them leave your body, but continue to 
think of them as joined in one. [lb] With prolonged practice your 
perception will become finer and subtler. Quite naturally you will 
be able to see within your body. The physical body will become 
gradually lighter, the essence more brilliant, and the light more 
concentrated. In your mind you will feel greatly restful, delighted 
and full of joy. You will go along with the energy of Great Peace. By 
then cultivating yourself, you can turn around and go along with 
all without. Within there will be perfect longevity; without there 
will be perfect accordance with the order of the universe. Without 
the exertion of any muscle you naturally attain Great Peace. 

To practice guarding the light of the One, when you have not 
yet attained concentration, just sit quietly with your eyes closed. 
There is no light seen in the inner eye. 

Practice guarding the One like this for a long time and a bril¬ 
liant light will arise. In the radiance of this light you can see all 
the four directions. Following it you can travel far. Using it, you 
can examine your person and body with penetration. The host of 
spirits will assemble. Thus you can transform your physical body 
into pure spirit. 

The practice of guarding the light of the One is the root of long 
life. With it, you can control the myriad spirits and go beyond all 
through the brilliant gateway of light. 

Practice guarding the One and concentrate on the light. It will 
first arise like fire. Be careful not to let it slip! The light will 
initially be red; [2a] with prolonged practice it will turn white. 
After another long stretch, it will be green. As you penetrate these 
lights, they will come nearer and nearer and eventually merge into 
one brilliance. Nothing is not illumined within; the hundred dis¬ 
eases are driven out. Guard it and never slacken! You will go be¬ 
yond the world and ascend to heaven! 

In guarding the light of the One, you may see a light as bright 
as the rising sun. This is a brilliance as strong as that of the sun at 
noon. 

In guarding the light of the One, you may see a light entirely 
green. When this green is pure, it is the light of lesser yang. 

In guarding the light of the One, you may see a light entirely 
red, just like fire. This is a sign of transcendence. 

In guarding the light of the One, you may see a light entirely 
yellow. When this develops a greenish tinge, it is the light of cen¬ 
tral harmony. This is a potent remedy of the Tao. 



196 


The One 


In guarding the light of the One, you may see a light entirely 
white. When this is as clear as flowing water, it is the light of lesser 
yin. 

In guarding the light of the One, you may see a light entirely 
black. When this shimmers like deep water, it is the light of greater 
yin. [2b] 

In guarding the light of the One, you may see your own abdo¬ 
men pervaded by light while the four directions are utterly in dark¬ 
ness. This is the light of great harmony, the Tao of great accordance. 

In guarding the light of the One, you may perceive utter dark¬ 
ness without and total blackness within. There is nothing to hold 
on to, nothing to see. This is the light of human disease, disorder, 
and nervousness. Take medicines and drugs to remedy this, then 
try to see any of the seven lights described above. To do so proceed 
in the following way: 

1. Focus on primordial energy and non-action by meditating on 
your body without the One. Just imagine your body as per¬ 
vaded by a white light. When the flourishing energy within is 
quite shapeless, there is nothing that is not done, nothing that 
is not known. 

2. Practice emptiness, nonbeing, and spontaneity by concentrat¬ 
ing on the center of the body. There will be a white radiance 
both above and below, pure like jade without the smallest flaw. 
This is the image of primordial energy and non-action. 

3. Count and measure in deep meditation all of your body, from 
top to toe. The distinctions between the five fingers, the exact 
nature of your physical body within and without—think of 
them as never constant. This meditation follows emptiness 
and nonbeing. [3a] 

4. Meditate on the gods residing in the five orbs and observe how 
they come and go. Carefully watch their movements. If you 
can put their activities into words, you can predict your good 
and bad fortune. This practice follows counting and measur¬ 
ing. 

5. The Great God of the Tao: Let the gods emerge from your body 
and mingle with the five agents and four seasons. The green, 
yellow, white, and black will thus equally come to be stored 
within. The gods emerge and enter, come and go freely as 
divine officials of the five agents and four seasons. Use them to 
subdue the hundred evil [demons]. 

6. The Spirits of Sensuous Attractions: Let the gods burrow deep 
and rout them out from the soil. The God of the Tao urges 



26. The True One 


197 


them all toward positive efforts; still they remain half-evil. 

7. The Administration of Earth: These are the deities of heaven 
and earth, the four seasons, soil and grain, mountains and 
rivers. Worship and offer sacrifices to them all. They will let 
you pass through all obstacles. You can traverse wherever you 
wish. Evil and false [demons] will be destroyed and can never 
resurface. [3b] 

8. Foreign Gods: These are strange and alien. Their ways cannot 
be controlled. They make people talk foolish things. Some¬ 
times they are similar to the perfected; sometimes they are 
more like evil [demons]. 

9. The Ancestors: They are of pure yin quality and do not belong 
among the perfected. They are just ordinary ghosts and spirits. 

The Tao of guarding the One applied in antiquity as much as 
today. There have always been various kinds of people guarding 
the One. Those of highest wisdom guard it and go beyond the 
world. Those of medium wisdom guard it and become emperors and 
kings, faithful servants and virtuous officials. People of lesser tal¬ 
ents practice it and are free from joy and anger. Through it, all 
under heaven is entirely free from bad things. 


26. The True One 

By the fourth century, the One had become a source of magical 
powers. The meditation had been combined with longevity prac¬ 
tices, rituals, and alchemy. Realizing the True One, the original 
unity and primordial oneness of all, meant placing oneself at the 
center of the universe, identifying one’s physical organs with con¬ 
stellations in the stars. The practice led to control over all the 
forces of nature and beyond, especially over demons and evil forces. 
The One as the root of all could give in a single stroke what cum¬ 
bersome visualizations of protective deities and the use of magical 
mirrors had done before. 

The section translated below is a description of the method of 
visualizing the True One taken from chapter 18 on “Earthly Truth” 
(Dizhen) of the Baopuzi neipian (Book of the Master Who Em¬ 
braces Simplicity, Inner Chapters). The text is contained in DZ 
1185, fasc. 868-70 (18.1a-3b). 

The Baopuzi is the major work of Ge Hong (261-341 c.e), from 
whose agnomen it takes its title. The book consists of two major 
parts, the “Inner Chapters” and the “Outer Chapters.” While the 



198 


The One 


former deals specifically with methods and secret transmissions of 
the immortals, the latter discusses social rules, morality, and other 
formal aspects of the practice. 

The Baopuzi is an important source for early Taoism, since it 
is rather precisely dated to about 320 c.e and can be definitely 
linked with the person of Ge Hong. A member of the aristocratic 
clans of South China who brought forth and spread the Tao of 
Highest Clarity, Ge Hong describes a characteristic form of south¬ 
ern Taoism. This, known as the Ge-family tradition, later became 
instrumental in the development of the Lingbao school, founded by 
Ge Chaofu, Ge Hong’s descendent. 

For a complete, if rather peculiar translation of the inner chap¬ 
ters of the text, see Ware 1966. For an English rendering of the 
outer chapters and a detailed discussion of Ge Hong’s life, see Sailey 
1978. For an account of various ways of guarding the One, see 
Kohn 1989a. On the magical mirrors used to identify demons at the 
time, see Kaltenmark 1974, Demieville 1987. 


“Earthly Truth” (Dizhen), from Baopuzi neipian (Book of the 
Master Who Embraces Simplicity, Inner Chapters), chap. 18. 

[la] The Master Who Embraces Simplicity says: My teacher 
used to say. 


If you can truly know the One, 

The myriad affairs are done! 

Knowing the One means that there is not a single thing that 
remains unknown. Not knowing the One means that there is not a 
single thing that can be truly known. 

The Tao arises from the One; it is honored without peer. Every¬ 
thing resides with the One and thereby reflects heaven, earth, and 
humanity. Thus we speak of the Three-in-One. 

Heaven obtained the One and became pure. Earth obtained 
the One and became restful. Human beings obtained the One and 
came to life. Spirit obtained the One and became numinous. Metal 
sinks, feathers float, mountains loom, and rivers flow—all because 
of the One. 

Yet—we look at it and cannot see it; we listen for it and cannot 
hear it. Visualize it, and it is there; startle it, and it is gone. Wel¬ 
come it, and there is good fortune; turn your back on it, and there 
is bad luck. Preserve it, and there is prosperity without end; lose it, 
and life declines, energy is exhausted. 



26. The True One 


199 


As the Venerable Lord himself said: 

Obscure it is! It is vague! 

In its midst, some appearance. 

Vague it is! It is obscure! 

In its midst, some being. 

[lb] This is just it. Also, the Immortality Scripture has. 

If you desire to extend your life. 

Guard the One and cultivate enlightenment. 

Meditate on the One! 

In extreme hunger 

The One will give you food. 

Meditate on the One! 

In extreme thirst 

The One will give you drink. 

The One possesses names and distinct garments. In the male it 
is 0.9 inch long; in the female, 0.6. Some locate it 2.4 inches below 
the navel, in the lower Cinnabar Field. Some find it in the Golden 
Tower of the Purple Palace below the heart, in the central Cinnabar 
Field. Then again people place it one inch behind the space between 
the eyebrows, in the Hall of Light; two inches in, in the Grotto 
Chamber; or three inches in, in the upper Cinnabar Field. 

These things are of particular concern to the Taoists, who for 
generations, as they continued to transmit its names, have smeared 
their lips with blood to seal them to secrecy. 

The One can complete yin and bring forth yang. 

The One governs heat and cold. 

Spring obtains the One and there is sprouting. 

Summer obtains the One and there is growth. 

Fall obtains the One and there is harvesting. 

Winter obtains the One and there is storing. 

The One is great beyond even the Six Harmonies. 

The One is minute beyond a hair or a sprout. 

Of old, when passing Wind Mountain on the road east to the 
Green Mountains, [2a] the Yellow Emperor met the Master of the 



200 


The One 


Purple Chamber and received from him the Esoteric Writings of the 
Three Sovereigns. This text enabled him to summon the myriad 
spirits. 

On his way south to the Fujian River on the slope of Round 
Hill, he visited the place the hundred commanders had climbed. He 
gathered the efflorescence of the Ruo and Qian trees and drank the 
waters of the Dan and Pei rivers. 

In the west, he met the Master of Middleyellow and received 
from him the methods of ninefold augmentation. When passing 
through Grotto Garden, he furthermore studied with the Master of 
Ample Perfection and from him received various scriptures on self- 
perfection. 

On his way north to Flood Dam, the Yellow Emperor then 
climbed Creeper Mountain, where he met the Lord of Greater Wei 
and the Lad of the Yellow Canopy. From them he received drawings 
of divine mushrooms. Retracing his steps back towards the royal 
palace, he moreover obtained the Divine Formula of the Golden 
Elixir [Cinnabar], 

Once he also reached Mount Emei. In a jade chamber there he 
met the Sovereign of Heavenly Truth and asked him about the Tao 
of the True One. 

The Sovereign said: 

“Already you are the ruler over the Four Seas. Now you also 
want to attain long life. Isn’t that rather greedy?” 

Their conversation cannot be described in full, so I have pro¬ 
vided this short part only. 

Now, as methods for the attainment of long life and immortal¬ 
ity, there is only the golden cinnabar. 

For the preservation of the body and the expulsion of evil, 
there is only the True One. For this reason, the ancients valued it 
in particular. 

[2b] The Immortality Scripture says: “The Scripture on Nine¬ 
fold Reverted Cinnabar, the Scripture on the Golden Fluid, and the 
Formula on Guarding the One all reside in the Five Cities on 
Mount Kunlun. Engraved on gold plaques, they are stored in jade 
boxes. These are sealed with purple mud and bear the imprint of 
the seal of state. 

Myself, I was so fortunate as to receive this Formula on Guard¬ 
ing the One from my teacher. It goes. 

Visualize the One 

In the center of the North Star and deep inside yourself: 



Fig. 18. Meditating under the Protection of the Dipper. Source: Wudou 
tanyi tujue. 

In front—the Hall of Light (in the head]; 

Behind—the Crimson Palace [in the heart!. 

Imposing—the Flowery Canopy [the lungs]; 

Lofty—the Golden Pavilion [the kidneys]. 

Left—the Gang Star; 

Right—the Kui [of the Dipper]. 





202 


The One 


Rising like a wave, 

Sinking like the void itself. 

Use mysterious mushrooms covering the cliffs, 

Vermilion herbs growing in the thickets. 

Gather white jade from the mountains. 

The radiance of the sun and the moon. 

Pass through fire and water! 

Traverse the dark and the yellow [heaven and earth]! 

Enter the maze of halls and gateways. 

Full of awnings in lustrous gleam! 

Helped by dragon guards, tiger watchmen. 

And spirit-man attendants. 

Don’t relax, don’t give in! 

Keep the One in its place! 

Don’t dawdle, don’t rush! 

Keep the One in its chamber! 

Once at ease and comfortable. 

The One will never leave. 

Guard the One, visualize the True One! 

The spirit world will be yours to peruse! 

Lessen desires, restrain your appetite! 

The One will remain at rest! 

Like a bare blade coming toward your neck— 

Realize you live through the One alone! 

Knowing the One is easy— 

Keeping it forever is hard! [3a] 

Guard the One and never lose it! 

Human limitations will not be for you! 

On land, you’re free from beasts. 

In water from fierce dragons! 

No fear of evil sprites or phantoms. 

No demon will approach, nor blade attack! 

This is the Great Formula of the True One. 

The Master Who Embraces Simplicity says: My teacher taught 
me how, with the meditations and magical practices taught in the 



26. The True One 


203 


various scriptures on the arts of the Tao, one can dispel evils and 
defend oneself. Altogether there are several thousand methods: 

Cover your shadow and become invisible; 
enter a state of suspended animation. 

Bring forth things in nine mutations; 

create twelve transformations and twenty-four life-forms. 

Meditate on the gods within the body; 

look inward to make them visible. 

The techniques are virtually innumerable—all of them are su¬ 
perbly effective and of tremendous power. 

Still, sometimes the mental creation of several thousand crea¬ 
tures to protect oneself is a lot of trouble. It is also a great labor for 
the mind. Thus, to make things easy, get to know the method of 
guarding the One. Then you can summarily abandon all other tech¬ 
niques. Thus we say: 

If you can truly know the One, 

The myriad affairs are done! 

There are clear instructions on how to receive the Formula of 
the True One. The lips are smeared with the blood of a white ani¬ 
mal. [3b] One waits for a propitious day for the actual transmis¬ 
sion. An agreement is entered into by means of white gauze and 
white silver. A tally of gold is notched and split. If one speaks the 
Formula lightly or transmits it without proper precaution, the gods 
it invokes will not respond. 

If you can guard the One, the One will also guard you. Then: 
Bare blades find no place in your body to insert their edge. 

The hundred hazards find no place to put their bad fortune. 

In defeat you can be victorious; 

In peril you can be secure. 

Whether 

in the shrine of a demon, 

in the depth of mountains and woods, 

in a place suffering from the plague, 

among tombs and graves, 

in thickets full of tigers and wolves, 

in hovels crawling with snakes and vipers— 



204 


The One 


guard the One without slackening and the multitude of evils 
will remain at bay. 


27. The Three Ones 

Within the Tao of Highest Clarity, the method of guarding the 
One was expanded to include visualizations of the Three Ones, the 
deities of the three primordial energies. Parallel to the essences of 
the Three Luminaries, i.e., the sun, the moon, and the stars, the 
Three Ones are guided to descend with the help of the Northern 
Dipper and enter the three Cinnabar Fields in the human body. 
With them firmly in place and their charges, the twenty-four ener¬ 
gies of the body, in good order, life can be extended and the body 
developed to a cosmic stage. 

The Jinque dijun sanyuan zhenyi jing (Scripture of the Three 
Primordial Realized Ones by the Lord Goldtower), is part of the 
Shangqing revelations. It is contained in DZ 253, fasc. 120. The 
same method, transmitted by the Lord Green Lad of the Eastern 
Sea to Master Juan, is also found in the Suling jing (Scripture of 
Immaculate Numen; DZ 1314, fasc. 1026). 

For an annotated translation of the text, see Andersen 1980. 
For a critical discussion of the scriptures involved, the Robinet 
1984. For more on the meditation, see Robinet 1979. 


Jinque dijun sanyuan zhenyi jing (Scripture of the Three 
Primordial Realized Ones by the Lord of the Golden Tower) 

[la] The perfected venerate the Three Ones as ultimate 
perfection; 

The Upper One is the Celestial Emperor; 
he resides in the body center [in the head]. 

The Middle One is the Cinnabar Sovereign; 
he resides in the Crimson Palace [in the heart]. 

The Lower One is the Primordial King; 
he resides in the Yellow Court [in the abdomen]. 

Together they supervise the twenty-four energies of the body 
and bring them in accord with the twenty-four deities of Great 
Tenuity. Through them, these energies combine in the vapor of 
emptiness and develop into pure spirit. 




27. The Three Ones 


205 


The three primordial Ones each have a thousand chariots and 
ten thousand horsemen; they ride in cloud chariots with feather 
canopies. With this entourage they frequently enter the Purple 
Palace and ascend to Highest Clarity. Listed in the primordial reg¬ 
isters, their rank is that of Perfected. They fly freely through the 
Nine Empyreans. 

Guard them firmly, and the Three Ones will become visible for 
you. Once visible, a thousand chariots and ten thousand horsemen 
will arrive [to escort you on your heavenly journey]. You can order 
a feather canopy and ride in a cloud chariot. You can ascend to 
heaven in broad daylight and rise up to Great Tenuity. 

[lb] In Great Tenuity there are twenty-four energies, inter¬ 
mingled in chaos. Gradually they coagulate into a single energy 
and begin to transform. After a certain time this energy divides 
and floats off. Each division still contains the twenty-four perfected 
of Great Tenuity. Thus the Lords Three Ones are one with and yet 
separate from the Tao. They transform themselves independently. 

Guard the Three Ones in your body and the Lords Three Ones 
of Great Tenuity will descend. They will appear before you and 
speak to you. 

[Like in Great Tenuity,] in the body there are also twenty-four 
perfected. They are similarly created through the division and trans¬ 
formation of essential radiance and pure energy. Sometimes cloudy 
chariots come to receive these perfected and they ascend to Great 
Tenuity. Together with the twenty-four deities of Great Tenuity, 
they then celebrate a feast in Cosmic Chaos. As their joined bril¬ 
liance divides and soars up, the powers within and without are 
joined together. They freely enter and leave Highest Clarity, lei¬ 
surely stop and rest in Great Tenuity. 

While guarding the Three Ones, you should also meditate on 
the Grotto Chamber [in the head]. [2a] In the Grotto Chamber 
there are the Yellow Tower, the Purple Gate, and the Chamber of 
the Mysterious Essence. Here the Lords Three Ones And their 
repose within the body. 

Meditation on both [the Grotto Chamber and the Three Ones] 
at the same time will make the gods visible all the sooner. Practi¬ 
tioners of the Grotto Chamber must by all means make guarding 
the Three Ones the deep root of their efforts. Practitioners of the 
Three Ones likewise must make meditation on the Grotto Chamber 
the lofty ceiling of their work. 



206 


The One 


Thus the Three Ones are necessary for both, and the Grotto 
Chamber does service for both. Their abodes are different, yet each 
is equally indispensable for the attainment of the other. By realiz¬ 
ing only one of them, however hard your efforts, you may be able to 
enter Great Clarity. But your rank there will be no higher than 
king of immortals. You will not be able to roam through Great 
Tenuity or float up to Highest Clarity. 

Realize therefore 

the Ultimate of the Upper One, emperor among the perfected; 

the Perfection of the Middle One, sovereign among the 
perfected; 

the wondrousness of the Lower One, king among the 
perfected. 

In antiquity, 

the Heavenly Sovereign attained this Ultimate and became 
the Lord of Sovereign Ultimate; 

the Earthly Sovereign attained this Perfection and became 
the Lord of Utmost Unity; 

the Human Sovereign attained this Wondrousness and 
became the Lord of the Manifold Wonders. 

The Three Sovereigns could become one with perfection be¬ 
cause they guarded the Three Ones. The Three Ones accordingly 
did not keep their shapes hidden but showed their true ultimate 
form to them. 

[2b] The Three Ones radiate together. Only through them are 
people born. Therefore students of the Tao, be they the Three Sov¬ 
ereigns of antiquity or ordinary mortals of today, always emphasize 
guarding the perfected. 

To guard the perfected, keep your mind simple and your spirit 
concentrated. Remain in deep absorption and be receptive to the 
mystery. The hundred thoughts must not arise; your concentrated 
intention should not scatter. Then, in only three months of inner 
vision, with focused mind and unified spirit, a divine light will 
appear before you, and you will first roam freely along with it. This 
state is reached by keeping the thoughts focused and not letting 
them scatter, by pulling energy together and harmonizing it. This 
is the perfection that comes from simplicity! It is the swiftest path 
to the Tao! 



27. The Three Ones 


207 


On the other hand, when simplicity is scattered and perfection 
is lost, the superficial and false begin to take over. Then a conten¬ 
tious mind arises and there is disorder within. In that case, the 
One does not appear immediately, and the gods do not respond very 
soon. You may not lack the desire to make them visible and come to 
stay, but you are not focusing hard enough and your concentration 
is not penetrating. Then the first flicker arises only after several 
years of effort. 

Therefore, be conscientious! Practice fasting of the mind and keep 
away from the world! Concentrate your mind hard and be without 
conscious plans! Even then you will still have to develop sensitivity for 
at least three months before you can actually face the One. 

The Three Primes represent the flawless perfection of the Nine 
Heavens, the Upright Tao of the Most High. [3a] Through them, 
the Great Tao of Utmost Unity brought forth the Perfected Em- 
peror-on-High; the Mysterious Perfection of the Upright Tao gave 
birth to the Great Divinity Above. The Three Primes dissolved and 
transformed, and the One was born. 

For this reason the host of the perfected return to the One. 
Thus the effort of attaining the mystery is fulfilled. The One is the 
ancestor of the Upright Tao, the original source of primordial 
energy. 

The way of the Three Ones is to observe the Tao as it mani¬ 
fests in the Three Primes. To do so, first you must embrace the 
numinous writings and treasure the sacred scriptures: 

The formula of the first One is found in the True Scripture of 
Great Pervasion. 

The formula of the second One is found in the Wondrous Scrip¬ 
ture of Great Being. 

The formula of the third One is found in the Highest Scripture 
of Immaculate Numen. 

For this reason the Upper One, the Celestial Emperor, trea¬ 
sures the True Scripture of Great Pervasion. 

The Middle One, the Cinnabar Sovereign, treasures the Won¬ 
drous Scripture of Great Being. 

The Lower One, the Primordial King, treasures the Highest 
Scripture of Immaculate Numen. 

These three scriptures contain the central essence of the Tao of 
Perfection. They are the supreme documents of the Three Ones. 



208 


The One 


They also contain the secret formulas of Highest Clarity. Wondrous 
indeed! Ineffable! The Tao is not far off! 

Guarding the One brings about the appearance of the Three 
Ones. Once you see them, you can ask for these scriptures. [3b] You 
are then entitled to receive the method of guarding the Three Ones. 
This is the first text revealed by the Lord Goldtower from the 
August Heaven of Highest Clarity. It contains the wondrous formu¬ 
las of the host of the perfected. 

Guard the One, and it will also guard you! 

See the One, and it will also see you! 

Coming and going—think of the One! 

A thousand troubles, a myriad affairs—think of the One! 

Eating or drinking—think of the One! 

Happy and joyous— think of the One! 

Sad and anguished—think of the One! 

Suffering and sick—think of the One! 

In danger and hardship—think of the One! 

In water and fire—think of the One! 

In a carriage, on horseback—think of the One! 

In worry and agitation—think of the One! 

To “think of the One” means that you keep your attention on it 
from beginning to end. If your thoughts tend to be still too many, 
then double your concentration to think of the One! 

Some people suffer because their determination is not strong. 
They cannot maintain the concentration for long. They know all 
the names of the One, but cannot guard it. When they try to guard 
it, they cannot keep their minds on it firmly. Instead, they wallow 
in personal praise, forever unable to persevere in the practice. Then 
of course the Three Ones depart and all good, healthy energy leaves 
with them. Once the good energy is gone, only bad, pathogenic 
energy is left. When there is nothing but pathogenies in the body, 
why, then the day of death is close. 

Some common people study the Tao, but only look for the fleeting 
and glamorous. They have no faith in the value of the perfected. 
[4a] In the beginning, they may have the will for it, but soon they 
deviate and end up in disgrace. This is because their determination 
is not firmly set. Thus pathogenic energy enters their bodies. 



27. The Three Ones 


209 


All rules about guarding the One warn sternly against lack of 
concentration. Yet even if there is concentration, there may be a 
lack of perseverance. And even if there is perseverance, there may 
be a lack of intensity. In any such case, the Three Ones will depart. 
Then the body will be an empty house without a master. With such 
a disaster, how can you last long? 

Energy assembles and becomes essence. Essence is set in mo¬ 
tion and becomes spirit. Spirit is transformed and becomes the 
immortal embryo. The embryo rises up and turns into a realized 
being. This realized being ascends and becomes an infant. He, in 
turn, is the perfected within. 

Heaven has Three Mysteries: the sun, the moon, and the stars. 
They contain the Three Essentials. These help people to attain long 
life. 

Human beings have Three Treasures: the three cinnabar fields. 
They contain the Three Perfected. These help people attain long 
life. 

Thus the Scripture of Numinous Treasure says, “The Three 
Essentials in heaven, the Three Perfected on earth—these Three 
Treasures endure forever.” This is just it. 

The Upper Cinnabar Field is located between the eyebrows 
inside the head. 

The Middle Cinnabar Field is the Crimson Palace in the heart. 

The Lower Cinnabar Field is located in the adomen, three inches 
below the navel. Together these are the Three Cinnabar Fields. 

The Upper Cinnabar Field is the residence of the Infant. 

The Middle Cinnabar Field is the residence of the Perfected. 

The Lower Cinnabar Field is the residence of the Immortal 
Embryo. 

[4b] As regards the Upper Cinnabar Field, one inch between 
the eyebrows towards the back of head, there is the Hall of Light. 
One inch further inside lies the Grotto Chamber. Yet another inch 
reveals the Niwan Palace in the Cinnabar Field. All these are lo¬ 
cated along one line toward the back of the head. The Niwan Pal¬ 
ace in the Cinnabar Field is perfectly square and measures one 
inch on each side. From here, purple energy surges up into heaven, 
radiating as far as ninety thousand miles. 

Located in the very center of the head, the Niwan Palace is 
covered by the seven stars of the Northern Dipper. The Dipper’s 



210 


The One 


bowl is above the center, while the handle points forward and out. 
It changes in size and tends to blur, so always actualize it firmly 
in your mind. 

The Infant of the Upper Prime resides right beneath the Dip¬ 
per. He is also called the god of Mystery-Coagulated Heaven and 
known as the first among the Three Primes. He holds the position 
of Celestial Emperor of the Niwan Palace. 

An imperial minister faces him from his right. He is the trans¬ 
formed spiritual essence of the teeth, tongue, and brain. He is called 
the god of Initial-Force Essence and known as bom from harmony 
and mystery. He is properly invested as imperial minister. 

The Celestial Emperor and his imperial minister together rule 
in the Niwan Palace. Both are dressed in scarlet robes, adorned 
with heavy embroidery. [5a] They look like newborn babies. 

The Celestial Emperor holds the Highest Clarity Talisman of 
the Divine Tiger, while his minister has the True Scripture of Great 
Pervasion in his hand. Sitting, they either both look out or face 
each other. 

On the inside, they watch over the Niwan Palace and guard 
the realms of the face, eyes, mouth, tongue, teeth, ears, nose, and 
hair. On the outside, they scare away the manifold demons and evil 
spirits of the Six Heavens. Once every five days, the three spirit 
souls go to pay them homage and receive instructions. 

The heart is the Middle Cinnabar Field. It is called the Crim¬ 
son Palace and located in the center of the heart. It is perfectly 
square and measures one inch on each side. From here, red vapors 
surge up into heaven, radiating as far as thirty thousand miles. It 
transforms itself and tends to blur, so always visualize it firmly in 
your mind. 

The Perfected of the Middle Prime resides here. He is also 
called the god of the Spirit-Revolving Pearl and known as the mas¬ 
ter of Southern Cinnabar. He holds the position of Cinnabar Sover¬ 
eign of the Crimson Palace. 

An auxiliary minister stands to his right. He is the trans¬ 
formed spiritual essence of the four viscera. Once in the Crimson 
Palace, he is invested as auxiliary minister. [5b] He is called the 
God of Radiance Solid and known as the master of the four numinous 
beasts. 

The Cinnabar Sovereign and his auxiliary minister together 
rule in the crimson palace. Both are dressed in robes of vermilion 
brocade. They look like newborn babies. 



27. The Three Ones 


211 



Fig. 19. Visualizing the Three Ones. Source: Baosheng jing. 


The Cinnabar Sovereign holds the planet Mars in his left hand 
and the Scripture of Great Protection in his right. The auxiliary 
minister holds the Wondrous Scripture of Great Being and the eight 
luminaries. Sitting, they either both look out or face each other. 

On the inside, they watch over the realms of the muscles, 
bones, five orbs, blood, and fiesh. On the outside, they scare away 
the harmful effects of the manifold pathogenic influences. 

Nurture their radiance and keep them at peace, then you may 
reach long life and eternal vision and fly off as an immortal into 
the Great Empyrean. 





212 


The One 


Once every three days the three spirit souls and seven mate¬ 
rial souls go to pay them homage and receive instructions. 

Three inches below the navel is the Lower Cinnabar Field. 
This is the Gate of Life. The Immortal Embryo of the Lower Prime 
resides here. It is perfectly square and measures one inch on each 
side. From here, white energy surges up into heaven, radiating as 
far as seventy thousand miles. It changes in size and tends to blur, 
so always visualize it firmly in your mind. 

The Lower Prime is also called the God of Beginning-Radiance 
Essence [6a] and known as the Glory of Primordial Yang. He holds 
the position of Primordial King of the Yellow Court. 

A guardian minister stands to his right. He is the transformed 
spiritual vapor of essence and energy, saliva and body fluids. Once 
in the Cinnabar Field, he is invested as guardian minister. He is 
called the God of Light Returned-Above and also known as the 
mystery of valley’s depth. 

The Primordial King and his guardian minister together rule 
in the Lower Cinnabar Field. Both are dressed in robes of yellow, 
embroidered gauze. They look like newborn babies. 

The Primordial King of the Yellow Court holds the planet Ve¬ 
nus in his left hand and the Scripture of the Golden Truth of the 
Stars Above in his right. His minister holds the Highest Scripture 
of Immaeulate Numen and the Nine-Garden Talisman of the Light 
of Life. Sitting, they either both look out or face each other. 

On the inside, they watch over the realms of the four limbs, the 
body fluids and the blood, the intestines, stomach, and bladder. On the 
outside, they dispel all calamity and misfortune and get rid of the 
manifold evil influences. Three times a day the three spirit souls and 
seven material souls go to pay them homage and receive instructions. 

How TO Guard the Three Ones 

On the day of Spring Beginning, at midnight, sit upright fac¬ 
ing east. [6b] Exhale nine times and swallow the saliva thirty-six 
times. 

Then visualize the seven stars of the Northern Dipper as they 
slowly descend toward you until they rest above you. The Dipper 
should sit straight above your head, with its handle pointing for¬ 
ward, due east. Visualize it in such a way that the stars Yin Essence 
and True One are just above the top of your head. The two stars 
Yang Brightness and Mystery Darkness should be further up. Also, 



27. The Three Ones 


213 


Yin Essence and Yang Brightness should be toward your back, while 
True One and Mystery Darkness are in front. Though the image 
may be blurred at first, concentrate firmly and focus it in position. 

Then concentrate on the venerable Lords Three Ones. They 
appear suddenly in the bowl of the Dipper above your head. Before 
long their three ministers arrive in the same way. After a little 
while, observe how the six gods ascend together to Mystery Dark¬ 
ness, from where they move east. When they reach the Heavenly 
Pass, they stop. 

Together they turn and face your mouth. See how the Upper 
Prime supports the upper minister with his hand; how the Middle 
Prime supports the middle minister; and how the Lower Prime 
supports the lower minister. 

Then take a very deep breath and hold it for as long as you 
can. [7a] The Upper Prime and his minister follow this breath and 
enter your mouth. Once inside they ascend and go to the Niwan 
Palace in the head. 



1 Yang Brightness 

2 Yin Essence 

3 True One 

4 Mystery Darkness 

5 Cinnabar Prime 

6 North Culmen 

7 Heavenly Pass 

Take another breath as deep as you can. The Middle Prime 
and his minister follow this breath and enter your mouth. Once 
inside they descend and go to the Crimson Palace in the heart. 

Take yet another breath as deep as you can. The Lower Prime 
and his minister follow this breath and enter your mouth. Once inside 
they descend and go to the Lower Cinnabar Field in the abdomen. 





214 


The One 


Next, visualize the star Heavenly Pass and bring it down to 
about seven inches before your mouth. While this star stands guard 
right before the mouth, the Three Ones firmly enter into their 
bodily palaces. 

All this complete, concentrate again on the Perfected to make 
sure they are all at rest in their residences. From then on, whether 
sitting or lying down, always keep them firmly in your mind. 

At any point during the practice, if concerns and desires arise 
in your mind, it will push to pursue them. Then, however much the 
mind strains to break free, make sure to keep it firmly concen¬ 
trated on the Three Ones. See that you remain at peace and in 
solitude! Also, if your bedroom is quiet enough, you may continue 
the practice well into the day. 

To visualize the Three Ones on the day Summer Beginning, 
face south. Then proceed as outlined above. 

To visualize the Three Ones on the day Fall Beginning, face 
west. Then proceed as outlined above. 

[7b] To visualize the Three Ones on the day Winter Beginning, 
face north. Then proceed as outlined above. 

Once you have fixated the Three Ones firmly in their resi¬ 
dences, the practice is complete. To conclude, quietly recite the 
following incantation: 

All five directions the Northern Dipper rules— 

The gods arrive through the seven stars. 

The Three Lords come through transformation. 
Summoned by the Purple Court above. 

The Six Gods arrive in downward flight. 

To reach my Three Palaces of Cinnabar. 

With them I join the Emperor-on-High, 

Enter the Yellow Calm below! 

Protected by the Perfected of the heavens, 

I call the six gods of time and those of space. 

Immortal, may I soon float up with them. 

Ride on the vapor of the Three Clarities! 

My four limbs strong and ever more refined. 

May my five orbs forever be alive! 



28. One in All 


215 


28. One in All 

Under the ever-growing influence of Mahayana Buddhism, in 
Taoism too samsara, the world as we know it, was identified with 
nirvana, the realization of the Tao. Practice in this context, al¬ 
though still necessary, was redefined as nonpractice, noncultivation, 
an emergence of a reality already there rather than an active 
progress, a pursuit. By the late Tang dynasty, guarding the One 
thus was no longer a gradual process of recovery of primordiality 
lost, but a form of noncultivation of non-action. 

The Xuanzhu xinjing zhu (Mysterious Pearly Mirror of the 
Mind), contained with commentary in DZ 574, fasc. 320 (and, with 
longer commentary, in DZ 575, fasc. 320), consists of two sets of 
poems revealed by Jiao Shaoxuan, the wife of a certain Lu Chui. 
Jiao was originally an immortal from the Heaven of Highest Clar¬ 
ity who came to reside in Fujian and be married to Lu. After fulfill¬ 
ing her earthly lifespan, she ascended back, leaving only an empty 
coffin behind. Her husband, finally realizing her celestial nature, 
begged her for instructions on the Tao. She returned once more and 
revealed the poems. They were published, with annotation, in 817. 


Xuanzhu xinjing zhu (Mysterious Pearly Mirror of the Mind 

Guarding the One 

Attainment of the Prime of the One 
Is not a gift from Heaven. 

Realization of Great Nonbeing 
Is the state of highest immortality. 

Light restrained, a hidden brilliance. 

The body one with nature; 

There is true peace, won but not pursued. 

Spirit kept forever at rest. 

In serenity and beauty: this is perfection! 

Body and inner nature, hard and soft. 

All is but cinnabar vapor, azure barrens. 

One of the highest sages— 

Only after a hundred years 
The tomb is discovered empty. 



216 


The One 


Selected Commentary 

The One is without form, the beginning energy of heaven and 
earth, the mysterious prime of life and its transformations. As Laozi 
puts it, “The Tao is the prime of life.” 

This then is Cosmic Chaos, the initial stage before all divided, a 
time of obscurity and darkness without name, without appearance. 

Laozi also says: “It is self-so. None knows its after; none knows 
its before.” 

Its height cannot be reached; its depth cannot be fathomed. 
Containing yin and emanating yang, it gives brightness to the three 
luminaries. So huge, it embraces heaven and earth; so minute, it 
fits into a blade of grass. 

Whoever in the world realizes it can be said to know the Prime 
of the One. 

To attain the Prime of the One, one must be firm even in 
hardship and live in solitary serenity. As one darkens the mind and 
refines the body, naturally spirit becomes more intense and the 
body more open. 

Eventually bones and flesh are blended with the dark mystery; 
they transform to pure primordiality. Shaking off the old body like 
a cicada sheds its skin, you can be in several places at the same 
time. Leave being and enter nonbeing; sit in one moment and be 
standing in the next; fly all over the great void. 

Once you know the One, guard it steadfastly and daily you will 
see the wonderful results—like an echo following a sound, like a 
shadow following a shape. 

Once you attain the Prime of the One, embrace the Prime and 
guard the One; you will And your Tao complete and your spirit 
powerful. You can then shake off your body and ascend yonder—to 
Jade Clarity, to the Center of Great Mystery. 

When the Tao is complete and the cosmic body attained, in 
your body there is no more outward force to pursue things outside; 
in your mind no more cunning wisdom to develop within. 

All your mind is then merged with Cosmic Chaos, free from 
the mind of the self. All your body is then merged with Cosmic 
Chaos, free from the body of the self. 

Just remember: as long as there is still ordinary body or mind, 
you cannot realize the spirit in its full power. 



28. One in All 


217 


The fully powerful spirit and the perfected cosmic body should 
be deeply at rest in the womb within. The womb in men is the 
Ocean of Energy; in women it is the Ocean of Blood. Spirit and 
body should be at rest there. 

As the Tao is complete, you become a perfected. You attain the 
cosmic body of no-body. Then the physical structure and inner na¬ 
ture are both hard and soft. They are soft because none in the 
world is softer than energy, is weaker than the Tao. They are hard 
because they can encompass heaven and earth and penetrate the 
myriad beings, even hard things such as metal and stone. 

Thus you can enter the Cinnabar Vapor, the Azure Barrens, the 
reaches of the Three Clarities, the realm of the Jade Capital and the 
Golden Tower. Here the rulers and sages of Heaven have their resi¬ 
dences—by guarding the Prime of the One you will be one of them. 

“After a hundred years, the tomb is discovered empty.” This is 
the pinnacle of the Tao, the crowning achievement of all the im¬ 
mortals. 

Who realizes this spontaneously knows the deepest depths and 
farthest distances of the universe, yet would not want to display 
such brilliance. People of the world thus see and hear only some 
vague outer manifestations, some marginal ornaments that may 
serve as points of comparison. 

Do you really think an immortal strides on a dragon, rides on 
the clouds, ascends to heaven in broad daylight, and that is all? 

No, spirit immortals prefer to erase their traces and hide their 
transformations. For this reason, they leave behind some medicine 
or a staff in place of a corpse; they use a sword or their slippers to 
hide the way in which they shed their mortal skins. 

By guarding the Prime of the One, this realization will soon be 
yours! 

The Great Tao of Guarding the One 

The Tao is non-action, yet does not do nothing. 

Purity of mind does not come from knowledge and wisdom. 

What is knowledge? What is purity? 

Knowledge depends on wisdom. Purity is freedom in going 
along. 

Going along, not following: this is pervasion of mind. 



218 


The One 


Pervade the One and all affairs are done! 

The One is the root, affairs are its gate. 

Affairs return to the One, but the One exists in 
permanence. 

It exists, yet is not there—so we borrow a term and speak 
of “guard.” 

Just guard emptiness and nonbeing, and you will live 
forever! 


Selected Commentary 

Non-action means to guard emptiness and nonbeing and the 
spontaneous flow of life. Be vague and obscure, pliant and vacant 
[like the Tao], never attached to even a single thing but totally 
concentrated in the mind. 

The Zhuangzi describes this state: “Smash up your limbs and 
body! Drive out your perception and understanding! Cast off your 
physical form! Get rid of all wisdom! Thus you can join the great 
pervasion of all!” 

In this state, within you won’t know that there is this self. 
Without you will never be aware that there are heaven and earth. 
Serene and placid, you cannot hear any more sounds, cannot see 
any more shape. This is true non-action. 

Although the Tao is in non-action, that does not mean that it 
does not do anything. “Do not do nothing” means that even if you 
guard non-action, there are still things that you will do. Also, it 
means that unless you actively “do” this Tao, the Tao will not be 
there for you. And then all the various things outside will combine to 
destroy your essence and spirit, ruin your inner nature and destiny. 

Independent of whether you are poor and humble or rich and 
noble, you will not even notice how your body and spirit are pur¬ 
sued and plagued by outside things and affairs—until you grow 
weak and old and sick. 

Thus the Scripture of Western Ascension says: “People usually 
consider satisfaction through sounds and sights the highest pos¬ 
sible happiness. They do not know that satisfaction through sounds 
and sights is the cause of all misfortune. The sage, on the other 
hand, never desires anything and recovers complete freedom from 
desires.” 

It also says, “The reason why people of the world undervalue 
life and die early is not that heaven and earth kill them or demons 



28. One in All 


219 


and spirits do them any harm. All their misfortunes are entirely 
caused by themselves. They come to life, and their lives become too 
rich. Only those who are free of life can thus be wise to properly 
nourish life.” 

The perfect Tao is continuous spontaneous accordance. It does 
not come from anything or anywhere. It just is. No one knows why 
or how. You must merely realize non-action in the middle of plain 
spontaneous so-being, and spirit pervasion will be yours. 

The way the Venerable Lord taught people to cultivate the Tao 
is the cultivation of the mind. To cultivate the mind is to cultivate 
the Tao. Now, the mind is the residence of spirit within the human 
body. When the mind remains empty and'in non-action, then it 
will, after some time, begin to radiate with the Tao. Once there is 
this radiance of the Tao, the spirit will be all-pervasive [omnipres¬ 
ent and full of supernatural powers]. 

Realize this spirit pervasion and there is nothing that is not 
pervaded! 

The Venerable Lord told Yin Xi, the Guardian of the Pass: 
“Just know how to guard the One, and the myriad affairs are 
done!” 

How much more should this be the case when spirit pervades 
the One? By embracing the Prime and guarding the One, the self 
joins the shapeless and becomes one with emptiness, nonbeing, and 
the spontaneous flow of life. Shape without shape, it consists of 
nothing but the one original energy. Thus the myriad affairs are 
done. 

Through guarding the One in all affairs, all efforts and merits 
return to the one original energy. Then the entire self becomes one 
with emptiness, nonbeing, and the spontaneous flow of life. Shape¬ 
less, this one original energy exists permanently. Yet it is not really 
there to be grasped. Thus we use the term “guard” to describe the 
practice. 

Guard emptiness, nonbeing, and the spontaneous flow of life, 
let your body and spirit become one with the Tao, and you can live 
forever as an immortal. 



Chapter Eight 


INSIGHT PRACTICE 


Following the successful concentration of the mind and full 
control over its movement, Taoists proceed to turn their focused 
attention on the analysis of self and world. This form of meditation, 
commonly described in the texts as “observation,” is inspired by 
Buddhism and very close to its insight meditation or vipasyand. In 
fact, the same term is used for both in classical Chinese: guan, a 
word defined in the earliest dictionaries as “to scrutinize,” “to ex¬ 
amine carefully.” 

The technique involves an active, conscious introspection of 
one’s own body and mind, reorganizing one’s ideas of self to cosmic 
dimensions. Where a single body and mind had been struggling for 
control before, now the self is raised to the level of heaven and 
earth, raised through yang and nourished by yin, helped and 
guarded by the gods and spirits, patterned and working in perfect 
accordance with the five agents and their various correlates. 

Observation, unlike concentration, can never be free from reli¬ 
gious doctrine. Observation means to take in objects and experi¬ 
ences and interpret them in a new way, to gain new insights in a 
way that is clearly outlined by the religion. 

Various levels and stages of Taoist observation can be distin¬ 
guished. First practitioners are instructed to focus on the energies 
moving around the body and see the constantly moving nature of 
everything in the world. They are to realize themselves as imper¬ 
manent, as part of a continuous chain of transformations of the 
Tao, mere particles in a huge universal rhythm of becoming and 
passing away, becoming and passing away. 

Next, they are led to the insight that unlike over their con¬ 
scious attention and concentration, they have not a trace of control 
over this continuously developing mass of energies. Neither their 
bodies nor their selves nor anything in the world is subject to their 


221 



222 


Insight Practice 


say-so; nothing whatsoever can be done actively to stop or speed 
the unfolding of the Tao. 

At the same time, however, all actions cause good or bad for¬ 
tune, depending on whether or not they harmonize with the flow 
that nature is taking at any given point. Taoists have to learn how 
to maintain a high awareness of their actions together with a strong 
sense of detachment and equanimity. They have to be “without 
feelings.” 

Once detached from the self and the world, practitioners can 
start to be joyful and happy about the workings of the Tao in and 
around them. They gain new insights into their bodies as replicas 
of the universe, understand the workings of the body gods and of 
pure spirit as the activity of the Tao within, and And a cosmic 
freedom by letting themselves go with the current, with the flow. 

This in turn leads to a fuller sense of oneness, of union with 
the Tao. Merging completely with the forces of the universe, practi¬ 
tioners lose themselves, forget themselves, become one with cosmic 
emptiness and nonbeing. The personal self and body are lost, a 
cosmic identity of the Tao is found and the immortal self emerges. 

Observation is thus a guide to new insights into the self and 
the world. It is a highly complex process that is sometimes de¬ 
scribed in very abstract and sophisticated terms. It is often found 
as an outline of what insights adepts are supposed to gain through 
their training. Mostly, however, observation is described as a prac¬ 
tical way of dealing with life and its various situations from the 
point of view of the Tao. 

The selections below reflect these various dimensions of obser¬ 
vation. There is first the philosophical analysis of “Two Kinds of 
Observation” taken from the seventh-century encyclopedia Daojiao 
yishu (The Pivotal Meaning of the Taoist Teaching). This work, 
strongly inspired by Buddhist Madhyamika, distinguishes several 
levels and types of observation, leading practitioners from the ordi¬ 
nary truth of the world to the absolute truth of enlightenment. 

Second, the Jinyi huandan yinzheng tu (Illustrated Progress to 
the Golden Fluid and Reverted Cinnabar), a theoretical outline of 
observation according to inner alchemy, is dated to the thirteenth 
century. Here, self and world are understood as part of several 
energies and forces, freely floating about and interacting with each 
other in complex ways. 

Both the third and fourth selections describe the more concrete 
dimensions of the practice, answering the question what a life in 
the Tao would be like in its most practical terms. The section on 



29. Two Kinds of Observation 


223 


“True Observation” of Sima Chengzhen’s Zuowang lun (Discourse 
on Sitting in Oblivion) of the eighth century describes how a Taoist 
of the right insight deals with sensual dependence, poverty, sick¬ 
ness, and death. It is written in a direct and engaging manner, 
full of concrete examples, not unlike the Zhuangzi, from which six 
stories are translated as a fourth selection. 


29. Two Kinds of Observation 

Under the influence of Buddhist Madhyamika, Taoist observa¬ 
tion reached its full philosophical height, formulated in the early 
Tang especially by the school of Twofold Mystery. This school of 
interpretation of the Daode jing describes the attainment of the 
Tao in the two stages of “mysterious and again mysterious” or 
“forgetting and again forgetting.” In this it applies the Buddhist 
theory of the two truths. 

The first stage leads from the wordly truth of ordinary people 
to the absolute truth realized by the sages, or from being to empti¬ 
ness. At this stage practitioners observe that all things are ulti¬ 
mately empty because they do not have solidity, an intrinsic 
permanent nature of their own. 

In the second stage both ordinary thinking and the vision of 
emptiness are “forgotten,” i.e., understood as yet another form of 
comprehended, formulated, solidified truth. Absolute truth at this 
stage is redefined as complete nonduality: neither being nor empti¬ 
ness, neither being nor nonbeing. This, however, coincides with the 
simultaneous existence of both: both being and nonbeing. 

This system applies the “Four Propositions” of the Madhyamika: 

affirmation of being; 

affirmation of nonbeing; 

negation of both, being and nonbeing; 

affirmation of both, being and nonbeing. 

Taoists use this scheme as well as the characteristic syntax of 
the Madhyamika to their own ends. It is very evident in the follow¬ 
ing description of the “Two Kinds of Observation.” It is taken from 
the Daojiao yishu (The Pivotal Meaning of the Taoist Teaching), a 
highly Buddhist-inspired encyclopedia of the seventh century, con¬ 
tained (with some lacunae) in DZ 1129, fasc. 762-63. The transla¬ 
tion covers section 17 (5.3b-6a), which seems to be incomplete. 



224 


Insight Practice 


For a discussion of observation in Taoism, see Kohn 1989b. For 
a summary of the worldview of the Daojiao yishu, see Kohn 
1992: 149-54. On Twofold Mystery, see Robinet 1977, Kohn 1992. 
For Chinese Madhyamika, see Robinson 1967. 


“Two Kinds of Observation” (Erguan), from Daojiao yishu 
(The Pivotal Meaning of the Taoist Teaching) 

[3b] The two kinds of observation are the deep realms of con¬ 
centration and insight, the mysterious gateway to emptiness and 
being. They are used to harmonize the mind and swiftly achieve 
the perfection of Twofold Mystery. Through these observations, agi¬ 
tation and worry will finally return to the shores of the twofold 
truth of the Tao. Pursuing them, one will certainly attain perfec¬ 
tion; following them, one will certainly find liberation from all 
dharmas. This, then, is their perfection. 

To explain: The two kinds of observation are the observation of 
energy and the observation of ‘spirit.’ The two terms ‘energy’ and 
‘spirit’ refer to the inner constituents body and mind. 

The body belongs to the realm of being; it is subject to the 
delusions of the World of Form. Thus the term ‘energy’ is used to 
refer to concentration. 

The mind belongs to the realm of nonbeing; it is difficult to 
fathom. Thus the term ‘spirit’ is used to refer to the insight of 
emptiness. 

The Scripture of Original Time says: 

“Observation of energy and spirit means concentration and 
insight. ‘Energy’ refers to the images of energy. In observing en¬ 
ergy, one visualizes the Three Ones. The wondrous energy and the 
mysterious images duly come to reside in the body. 

“ ‘Spirit’ on the other hand, refers to that which is without bent 
and cannot be fathomed. It appears in two different kinds of in¬ 
sight—that of illumination and that of emptiness. Both are impos¬ 
sible to think of In a myriad ways without bent, spirit’s principles 
are complete and unfathomable.” 

To summarize thus what observation means, we can say that it 
is to meditate and examine. In other words, one meditates and 
visualizes the wondrous One, on the one hand, and examines and 
inspects what lies beyond all phenomena, on the other. 

[4a] The Scripture on the Practice of Observation says: 

“In proper observation of all dharmas, neither attract nor re¬ 
ject, neither move nor rest! Enter the wondrous gateway to the One 



29. Two Kinds of Observation 


225 


and reach the higher stages: the stage of nonbeing, the stage of no¬ 
stages, and the stage of pure virtue.” 

Observation of energy lies basically in properly observing the 
body; it consists of making it tranquil. This is concentration. The 
word has two meanings: first, it refers to the expedient method 
practiced before observation; second, it indicates the actual prac¬ 
tice of the observation of being. All this, then, is the observation of 
energy. 

Observation of spirit, on the other hand, is the observation of 
nonbeing. The Scripture on the Practice of Observation states it 
clearly: 

“Observation of spirit is cultivated outside the world; observa¬ 
tion of energy is practiced within.” 

To clarify the two kinds of observation of energy and spirit, one 
must thus distinguish between concentration and insight. This dis¬ 
tinction, in turn, is based on the difference between body and mind 
and therefore refers immediately to the two realms of being and 
emptiness. 

Observation of energy is concentration; although it pervades 
both emptiness and being, it is primarily concerned with the won¬ 
drous realm of being. 

Observation of spirit is insight; although it pervades both be¬ 
ing and nonbeing, it mainly deals with true emptiness. 

The distinction between the two kinds of observation in terms 
of emptiness and being as well as the differentiation between in¬ 
sight and concentration are only expedient means of the masters of 
insight. Although it does not refer to any outer reality, it is yet of 
great importance in understanding observation. 

In our practice, we thus first differentiate different kinds, then 
integrate all into the one true observation. [4b] How is this done? 
When all the myriad actions are equally subject to insight, then 
there is only the observation of emptiness. This, in turn, is the 
insight of true emptiness. 

Realize also that in concentration and insight, one does not 
reach enlightenment and perfection of body and mind through the 
two major kinds of observation alone. Rather, there are five differ¬ 
ent sets of three levels of observation. 

One such set of three is: 

1. Observation of apparent existence. 

2. Observation of real existence. 

3. Observation of partial emptiness. 



226 


Insight Practice 


These, in fact, refer to the practitioners of the Lesser Vehicle, 
who are as yet unable to awaken to the full mystery. First, as long 
as one does not abandon all analysis and does not realize empti¬ 
ness, one still accepts reality and abandons emptiness. 

Then one may come to accept emptiness and abandon reality, 
or one may even accept emptiness and at the same time abandon 
it. This brings one to the two higher states and opens up the libera¬ 
tion through emptiness. Thus there are first these three levels. 

As concerns the observation of apparent existence, ‘apparent’ 
means having a temporary appearance, whereas ‘existence’ refers 
to the embodiment of things. If you wish to gain a proper insight 
into observation of the host of living beings, it is very difficult to 
make yourself empty, but it is rather easy to make beings empty. 

For example, when it comes to understanding the fact that the 
five aggregates [matter, sensations, perception, mental formations, 
and consciousness] make up oneself, how could one know which 
aggregate is oneself? Thus the Zhuangzi says: “The hundred joints, 
the nine orifices, the six repositories all come together and exist 
here. But which part should I feel closest to?” 

If you don’t feel very close to any one part as the one that 
constitutes yourself, you have begun to understand the emptiness 
of apparent existence. [5a] This is what we call observation of ap¬ 
parent existence. 

Observation of real existence deals with the substance-reality of 
everything. Knowing already that all apparent existence is empty, 
you must now observe and examine the substance-reality underlying 
it. What actually is its substance-reality? Where does it come from? 
It must arise from something else. But if we assume that it arises 
from something else, we come to an endless chain of origination. 

If we assume, on the other hand, that this chain is not endless, 
then substance-reality must ultimately come from emptiness. If we 
now assume that it arises from emptiness, we must try to grasp 
this emptiness. But as emptiness is nothing in itself, how can we 
say that it brings forth something? This way we understand that 
real existence cannot be accepted either. This is the observation of 
real existence. 

Observation of partial emptiness: Here ‘partial’ means not yet 
proper, whereas ‘emptiness’ refers to a free and pervading way of 
seeing. This is practiced in order to get rid of all the numerous 
diseases of attachment which all beings are suffering. Thereby one 
gradually realizes true emptiness. 

The Scripture of Ascension to the Mystery says: 



29. Two Kinds of Observation 


227 


“To renounce being, place it first above nonbeing. To embody 
nonbeing, emphasize the nonexistence of nonbeing.” 

Followers of the Lesser Vehicle merely stick to the teaching 
but cannot reach the remote original mind. Thus they continue to 
be involved with feelings and see the state of emptiness only par¬ 
tially. [5b] Therefore we know that the viewpoint of partial empti¬ 
ness of the Lesser Vehicle is not yet proper observation. 

Proper observation means to observe emptiness as emptiness 
and through emptiness. Only thus can one see the true emptiness 
of all apparent and real existence. This is why we speak of empti¬ 
ness. As there is nothing beyond the apparent and real, where 
would emptiness come to reside? Thus we know that emptiness is 
empty in itself 

As the Scripture of Original Time says: 

“True emptiness is indeed empty; empty emptiness is indeed 
empty.” 

Another set of three levels of observation consists of the 
following: 

1. Observation of being. 

2. Observation of nonbeing. 

3. Observation of the Middle Way. 

Observation of being refers to seeing the solidity of material 
existence; thus it is called observation of being. Concentrate deeply 
on the solidity of matter. Soon you will attain the nonbeing of all 
solidity. This is the same as the nonbeing of non-solidity. With no 
solidity at all, how can one concentrate on solidity? 

Therefore the method is not to deny solidity and thus to come 
to non-solidity, but rather to take solidity and make it into non¬ 
solidity, to take non-solidity and make it into solidity. Doing so, you 
realize that what is really not solid only appears to be solid. Thus 
you know that what does really not exist only appears to exist. 

Who practices this observation duly attains the gateway to 
complete observation. Then there will be no more solidity or being. 
This, then, is the observation of non-solidity of being. How can it 
not be all-pervasive? 

With this you will soon see that all constructed mental states 
and projections of being are equally without any solidity. [6a] As 
you thus realize that all constructed mental projections of being 
are deeply unfathomable, you can truly pervade them all. 



228 


Insight Practice 


How, then, does this relate to the three levels? Embodying 
what is not real, there is emptiness. If it is not not apparent, then 
we say there is being. 

If there is being, then there is both emptiness and non-empti¬ 
ness. Therefore there is neither being nor emptiness. This is the 
level of the Middle Way. 

Once constructed mental projections come to see this, your obser¬ 
vation will follow suit. Then, while we still use language to refer to 
these things, we speak of observation. 

Observation of nonbeing refers to seeing the non-solidity of 
nonbeing. This observation speaks about nonbeing being without 
solidity. Cutting off this linguistic help to understanding, one can 
never attain it. However, as long as we use this linguistic help, 
nonbeing remains an entity and is therefore solidity. 

Pondering this, you realize that there is no way. It is neither 
solidity nor non-solidity, whether you take non-solidity and make it 
into solidity or take solidity and make it into non-solidity. Thus you 
know that solidity is also non-solidity, that therefore non-solidity is 
also nonbeing. Through this observation you can return to the gate¬ 
way of completion [of the Tao]. 

As you observe the gateway of completion, you can realize all 
the three levels. How is that? 

Nonbeing is also not nonbeing. On this level it is like being. 
Then again nonbeing is neither nonbeing nor not nonbeing. On this 
level it is like nonbeing. When it is like nonbeing, it is not being. 
When it is like being it is not like nonbeing. [6b] Both like non- 
being and not being as well as like being and not nonbeing—this is 
the level of the Middle Way. 

Observation of the Middle Way refers to the proper embodi¬ 
ment of the latter. Both being and nonbeing are thus at the same 
time neither being nor nonbeing. This realization is the observa¬ 
tion of the Middle Way. 

Observe constructed mental projections: they are like this. Ob¬ 
serve the physical structure of the body: it is like this. In its far¬ 
thest sense, this observation looks neither at the origin of all nor at 
being or nonbeing in particular. 

Being and nonbeing are not. Not being there, they are yet not 
not there. The ultimate meaning of the three levels of this observa¬ 
tion lies just in this. Speaking about it in terms of center and sides, 
one could say that both being and nonbeing are the sides, while 
neither being nor nonbeing are the center. [This is the observation 
of the Middle Way.] 



30. Energies and Elixirs 


229 


30. Energies and Elixirs 

Observation according to inner alchemy sees the world less in 
terms of emptiness and being than through the looking-glass of 
energies and elixirs, metals and trigrams. 

A development of the Song dynasty, inner alchemy integrates 
the various strands of the tradition. It makes much use of the 
terminology and system of the Yijing (Book of Changes) and ap¬ 
plies the process of elixir concoction in operative alchemy to de¬ 
scribe the inner spiritual development of the adepts. Its language 
is intentionally confusing to ensure the secrecy and integrity of the 
transmission. 

Bound to the confidence between master and disciple, there 
are many different systems and styles in inner alchemy. In its most 
general, the process can be described as consisting of three basic 
stages: first, the mutation of essence to energy; second, the devel¬ 
opment from energy to spirit; and third, the merging of spirit with 
emptiness or the Tao. 

Essence, of course is fundamentally sexual energy, located in 
the lower Cinnabar Field and aroused by intercourse. In inner 
alchemy this is reverted back to its original form, i.e., the subtler 
energy that flows throughout the body, by avoiding its downward 
movement and bringing it back upwards through massages and 
meditations. This leads to the development of a concentrated and 
purified form of essence, the pearl of immortality, the first grain of 
the cinnabar elixir, the first trace of the golden fluid. 

In a second stage, this pearl is developed into an immortal 
embryo through the union of the adept’s inner yin and yang forces. 
At this stage a set of identifications takes place: 

yang = heart = fire = Li (Fire-Trigram) = pure lead; 

yin = kidneys = water = Kan (Water-Trigram) = pure mercury. 

In meditation as in the process of operative alchemy, these 
energies are revolved again and again, following an exact time 
schedule and being properly positioned according to the traditional 
stems and branches of the calendar and the compass. The cycle 
that is established within the body at this point includes not only 
the spine and breastbone, but also leads through the five orbs. It is 
known as the macrocosmic orbit. 

At this stage the pure power of yin and yang is extracted from 
the various energies, and symbolized as the trigrams of Heaven 



230 


Insight Practice 


and Earth (Qian and Kun). These are at the root of creation, to 
which the adept is gradually proceeding. 

In the third and last stage, the immortal embryo, still semi¬ 
material, is transformed into the pure spirit body of the immortals, 
the body of pure original yang (not yang as opposed to yin), of life 
as such (no longer of life as opposed to death). The child is born, 
completed and begins an independent existence. It can ascend to 
the heavens and will be the form in which the practitioner survives 
forever. 

The Jinyi huandan yinzheng tu (Illustrated Progress to the 
Golden Fluid and Reverted Cinnabar), found in DZ 151, fasc. 68, 
outlines this process. The text was edited by Wang Jingxuan in 
1234 and has a preface by Longmeizi, dated to 1218. It belongs to 
the southern tradition of Song-dynasty inner alchemy in the envi¬ 
ronment of Bai Yuchan (fl. 1194-1229). Bai was born on Hainan 
Island, spent his youth wandering around famous mountains, and 
eventually settled on Mount Wuyi in Fujian. He may have been 
received by the emperor in the late 1220s. Most of his writings, 
compiled by his students, are dated to 1212-21. The text here fits 
well into the known pattern of his work. It consists of twenty po¬ 
ems, the first seven of which are rendered below. 

For a survey of inner-alchemical practices, see Needham 1983. 
On the philosophical understanding and theoretical system of in¬ 
ner alchemy, see Robinet 1989. Translations and discussions of in¬ 
ner-alchemical texts are found in Wilhelm 1962, Lu 1970, Baldrian- 
Hussein 1984, Cleary 1987, 1991, and 1992. 


Jinyi huandan yinzheng tu (Illustrated Progress to the 
Golden Fluid and Reverted Cinnabar) 

The Origin 

Dark and obscure and without light, before even Great 
Ultimate, 

The whirlwind moves with violence to bring forth true lead. 

All, reaching tranquility, returns and moves again— 

Thus from the limitless is born that which limits has. 

The one energy emerges as the first sign from the empty; 

The two forms, soon after, revolve in its firm center. 

Life after life, change after change, it continues without end. 
Like magic, in the cauldron there’s another grotto heaven. 



30. Energies and Elixirs 


231 


The Need to Awaken 

Your cast-off bones, as you look back, are piled up mountain- 
high; 

The tears you shed, they now amount to the four seas’ 
expanse. 

The world continues to decline, running toward collapse. 

The life of man, a snap it lasts, and what joy does it have? 



Fig. 21. The Two Trigrams. Source: Jinyi huandan yinzheng tu. 









232 


Insight Practice 


Become a man, be born a woman—through a thousand 
transformations. 

Emerge with horns, be thickly furred—a myriad different 
shapes. 

Unless you do awaken to this life’s truth right now. 

Then, when this life is over, what will you become? 

The Trigrams of Heaven and Earth 

Chaos Primordial divided, but first was Former Heaven; 

Clear and turbid then split up, and the two emblems 
formed. 

Earth-trigram: female; Heaven-trigram; male, each partial 
energy; 

Wood-dragon, metal-tiger, separate after a thousand years. 

Remain alone and solitary to cultivate the Tao— 

How else could you merge with soft and hard to create 
mystery? 

Apply yourself to unknowing, to topsy-turvy reason. 

Attain this Way and a perfected you will be. 

Cauldron and Implements 

To refine the cinnabar, you need cauldron and furnace. 

They stand for Heaven and for Earth and must be rightly 
molded. 

Circumference three times five, diameter just one. 

Upper rim four times eight, lower belly ample. 

The cauldron’s lead check carefully, its core must be right 
solid. 

Fiery yang will lick on it, from the base below. 

No need to meet a perfected to teach you all in person. 

This explains where you must settle down your center. 

Lead and Mercury 

Lead emerges from white metal, mercury brings forth red 
sand. 

Cinnabar and relatives use those to come right forward. 

To transmute minerals and metals into perfection’s drug. 

Pick it like millet and like barley, but also check long hemp. 



30. Energies and Elixirs 


233 



Fig. 22. The Crucible. Source: Jinyi huandan yinzheng tu. 


The yellow male in Water-trigram is the site of mercury. 

The dark maiden in the Fire-trigram is the home of lead. 
Distinguish clearly who they are, what is true and false, 
Then soon the true lead will sprout forth like a horse’s teeth. 

Harmonization 

Two times eight, the source is clear, the first true one 
emerges. 

No more words; they come on level and are evenly balanced. 




234 


Insight Practice 


If you don’t know where yin and yang find their harmony, 
Then take a closer look at the positions of zi, wu, and chen. 

Above chen, the prime’s set up, making use of si. 

Where hai emerges, there must also be a yin. 

Meeting and joining equally, they establish three and five. 
In harmony, there’s central yellow and true perfection born. 

True Lead 

The one energy of Former Heaven, this is called true lead. 
Never trust deluded students of a faked transmission. 

A myriad transformations continue on and on, building 
karma from the start. 

The single soul flies ever fast, can only trust the alms-bowl. 



Fig. 23. The Dragon, the True Lead of Creation. Source: Jinyi huandan 
yinzheng tu. 






31. Observing Life 


235 


Once there’s a body and the solidity of life, nothing’s really 
right. 

Only without this life and body can there be perfection. 
Hear the words of Tao tradition and learn them eagerly, 
Use the true lead, but don’t mistake it for ordinary stuff! 


31. Observing Life 

In another vein, observation also means to deal with the reali¬ 
ties of life from the point of view of the Tao. How to do this is 
described in some detail in the section translated below. Entitled 
“True Observation” {Zhenguan), it forms the fifth of altogether seven 
sections in the Zuowang lun (Discourse on Sitting in Oblivion), a 
set of systematic instructions given by the Tang-patriarch Sima 
Chengzhen (746-835) to his disciples. 

The Zuowang lun outlines the ascent to the Tao in seven steps. 
It begins with “Respect and Faith,” emphasizing that successful 
practitioners must have a firm will and strong determination to 
pursue the Tao as well as full confidence in the teachers and scrip¬ 
tures to guide them on the way. In a second step, “Interception of 
Karma,” they must then leave their ordinary life behind, at least 
temporarily, to stop producing any more involvement with the world 
and karma for future lives. 

The third step, “Taming the Mind,” corresponds to the concen- 
trative phase of Taoist meditation. Adepts are told to firmly fixate 
their attention and how to deal with the various difficulties that 
arise in the process. Step four, “Detachment from Affairs,” sees the 
first glimpses of a new vision, interpreting life and all experiences 
in the light of inner nature and fate, i.e., character and karma. 
Both the nature and nurture one has received in this life are seen 
as the raw material the Tao has used to fashion one’s self. A more 
cosmic dimension of life is found. 

The fifth level, “True Observation,” describes the practical con¬ 
sequences of a Tao-centered view for the dealings of one’s everyday 
life. In step six, “Intense Concentration,” practitioners go beyond 
observing self and world to attain a deeper absorption in the Tao. A 
formless trance of oneness would best describe the goal at this 
stage. The final step, then, is “Realizing the Tao,” the attainment of 
full oneness and union, the emergence of the immortal self. 

The text used here is found in DZ 1036, fasc. 704 (8b-12a). A 
variant version is contained in Yunji qiqian 94. A more original 
inscription of the same title was erected in 829 before the temple 



236 


Insight Practice 


dedicated to Sima’s memory on Mount Wangwu, his lifetime resi¬ 
dence. For a full and annotated translation of the entire text as 
well as a discussion of its various concepts, see Kohn 1987. The 
rendering here is taken from the same work. 


“True Observation” (Zhenguan), from Zuowang lun 
(Discourse on Sitting in Oblivion) 

[8b] True observation is the first mirror of the man of wisdom, 
the skillful examination of the able person. Probing misfortunes 
and blessings as they come, analyzing the good fortune and calami¬ 
ties of activity and rest, such a one sees ahead of life’s motions and 
arranges things accordingly. He deeply prays and guards his con¬ 
centration, serves the completeness of life. Thus he commits no 
action in attachment from beginning to end, nor do his principles 
oppose his actions. This, then, is the practice of true observation. 

One bite of food or a wink of sleep can become the source of 
some decrease or advance; a single step or even just one word may 
lay the foundation for good and bad fortune. Though one might 
cleverly control the results, it is much better to be on one’s guard 
against the very foundations. By observing the roots, one can know 
the branches. 

However, one must first be free from impatient, competitive 
feelings. This is why we gather in the mind and detach ourselves 
from affairs; we let our actions decrease every day, calm the body 
and relax the mind. Only in such a state can one truly observe the 
wonders of the world. As the Scripture of the Tao and the Virtue 
has it: “Let there always be no desires so that the wonders may be 
observed.” 

Nevertheless, even a person cultivating the Tao must have 
clothing and food. There are affairs that cannot be given up or 
people one cannot leave behind. Those have to be taken care of 
with great humility; they should be attended to with clear vision. 
Don’t take them as an obstruction to the Tao and let your mind 
develop anger and impatience. [9a] As soon as there are anger and 
impatience due to some affair, the mind will be sick and agitated. 
How, then, can it be a restful mind? 

All human affairs, all clothing and food are just my boat. I 
want to cross an ocean, so I need a boat. After I have crossed the 
ocean, the reason for the boat is no longer there. But why abandon 
it before the trip? Clothing and food are empty illusion and cer¬ 
tainly not sufficient provision in themselves. But in order to gain 



31. Observing Life 


237 



Fig. 24. Sima Chengzhen, the author of the Discourse on Sit¬ 
ting in Oblivion. Source: Liexian quanzhuan. 

liberation from empty illusion, one must obtain clothing and food. 
Although one has to look for and obtain them, one should therefore 
never regard them with feelings of gain or loss. 





238 


Insight Practice 


Independent of whether one has to deal with affairs or is free 
from them, the mind should remain constantly at rest. Join others 
in seeking but not in coveting; join them in achievement but not in 
hoarding. Without coveting you will be free from worry; without 
hoarding you will never experience loss. Your ways of living in the 
world may be like those of others, but your mind should always 
remain different from ordinary folk. This truly is the key to suc¬ 
cessful practice; it should be practiced seriously. 

Despite a growing detachment from affairs there might still be 
a sickness hard to get rid of. In that case, just follow the method 
and observe it. There may be, for example, deep sensual attach¬ 
ment. That being so, observe the fact that all defilements and sen¬ 
sual attachments arise merely from imagination. If there is no 
imagination, there can never be any sensual attraction. Realize 
therefore that sensual imaginings are empty on the outside, [9b] 
while sensual feelings are foolish within. As they are nothing but 
foolish feelings and empty imaginings, who would be the master of 
sensual feelings? The Scripture of Fixating the Will says: “Sensual¬ 
ity is entirely imaginative. All imagination is ultimately empty. 
How can there be something like sensuality?” 

Also, people should think that the attraction of a seductive 
woman is even more dangerous than that of a fox lady. When a fox 
lady seduces a man, she arouses loathing and distress. Hence men, 
even if they die from the contact, do not enter the evil ways. Loath¬ 
ing and distress keep them away from debauchery. Human beau¬ 
ties, however, beguile men, make them fall in love and get attached 
to them. They will then hanker after them with all they have. 
Because of their depraved thoughts, after death they fall into hell. 
Forever they turn away from birth in the world of human beings 
and from the road to happiness. As the Scripture says: “Why is it 
that people of one mind and joined as a couple in this world after 
death do not attain the human state together again? It is because 
of depraved thoughts.” 

Then again, why—if sensual attraction ultimately means 
beauty—do fish upon seeing such beauty enter deeper into the 
water, and birds fiy off into the sky? Immortals observe sensual 
feelings as defilements and impurities; wise men compare them to 
knives and axes of punishment. In the course of your life, if you 
don’t eat for seven days, you will die. Yet, if you remain without 
sensual feelings for a hundred years, you will avert the harm of an 
untimely departure. [10a] Realize therefore that sensual feelings 
are neither essential nor appropriate for body or mind. Rather, 



31. Observing Life 


239 


they are enemies and thieves of inner nature and destiny. Why 
must you be subject to affection and lust and invite disaster and 
destruction? 

If you see another do evil and give rise to enmity and hatred in 
your own mind, this is just as if you were seeing someone kill 
himself and promptly stuck out your own neck to accept the other’s 
blade and get killed yourself The other person commits evil all by 
himself; he does not ask you to do the same. Why, then, should you 
reach out to take in the other’s evil and make yourself sick? If you 
can feel enmity when you see someone do evil, then you will also 
react with bad feelings upon seeing someone do good. Why is that? 
Because in both cases your Tao is obstructed. 

Now, if you suffer from poverty, observe this reality and ask 
yourself: “Who made me poor?” Heaven and earth are equable and 
regular; they protect and support all without personal aims. So if I 
am poor now, you should argue, it is certainly not their fault. When 
parents give birth to a child, they desire to see him or her in wealth 
and high esteem. So if I am poor now, I cannot blame it on my 
parents. Other people, ghosts, and spirits don’t even have the time 
to save themselves; how then would they have the energy to make 
me poor? 

Going back and forth, I cannot find anyone to blame for my 
poverty. So I know it’s my own karma, my very own heaven-given 
destiny. I bring forth my own karma, while heaven provides me 
with the destiny of this life. 

[10b] Karma relates to destiny like shadow and echo follow 
form and sound. They cannot be avoided and should not be re¬ 
sented. Only with wisdom can you act benevolently and realize 
them fully, delight in heaven and acknowledge your destiny. Then 
you will never lament over eventual sufferings through poverty. 
Therefore the Zhuangzi says: “Karma enters in and cannot be pre¬ 
vented from becoming one’s own karma.” Poverty and diseases come; 
they cannot be kept away or eliminated completely. 

Thus the Scripture says: “Heaven and earth cannot alter their 
routine; yin and yang cannot revert their tasks.” Looking at it from 
this angle, it indeed is a true destiny, not a mere mask. How could 
you resent it? 

Your situation can be compared to the encounter of a brave 
knight with a band of brigands. Never feeling dread or fear, he 
brandishes his sword and rushes to the battle front, fighting until 
the robbers flee. Having thus gained merit in service, he is gloriously 
rewarded for the rest of his life. If now there are poverty and dis- 



240 


Insight Practice 


eases vexing and troubling me, then these are my robbers and brig¬ 
ands. With an upright mind, I can be a brave knight. Examining 
them in wisdom and by observation, I brandish my sword. The battle 
is won when all vexations and forms of bondage are eliminated. To 
be at peace and constantly happy—this is the glorious reward. 

[11a] But often, when suffering or affairs come to harass us, 
the mind instead of using this observation gives rise to sadness and 
anxiety. This, then, is like an encounter with brigands when you, 
rather than gaining merit in service, cast off all weapons and turn 
your back on the battlefield. You duly have to bear the shame of 
desertion and defeat. Thereby you reject happiness and invite suf¬ 
fering. For such foolishness, how could there be empathy? 

Now, if you are suffering or have a disease, first of all observe 
that it originates in the body. Without a body the suffering would 
have no place to dwell. As the Scripture of the Tao and the Virtue 
says: “If I had no body, what suffering would I have?” Next, observe 
the mind. You will find that it has no true lord. Even though you 
search for him inside and out, you won’t be able to find him anywhere. 

All plans and thoughts arise only from a deluded mind. Thus 
when you “make your body like dried wood and your mind like 
dead ashes,” all suffering and diseases will be eradicated. Someone 
who hates death, for example, should therefore think of his body as 
the lodge of the spirit. As the body becomes old and sick, as the 
power of his energy declines and gets weaker, it will just be like a 
house with rotting walls. Once uninhabitable, he must abandon it 
and look for another place to stay. The death of the body and the 
departure of the spirit are thus a mere change of residence. 

However, when you hanker after life and loathe death, thus 
resisting the natural transformations, your spirit will be confused 
and fall into error. It will lose its proper role, [lib] Then, when you 
are entrusted to life again and receive the constituting energy, you 
will not lean to the pure and refined, but end up with turbid and 
disgraceful energy. Generally, all stupid and dull people, all the 
dumb and greedy ones, come into being like this. 

Only when you do not feel exhilarated when alive or unhappy 
when facing death, can you fully make life and death equal. Thereby 
you will bring forth good karma for the future bodies to come. But 
by craving for a myriad different things, you will only end up with 
love and disease alternating. If even one limb is sick, the whole 
body is in discomfort and unrest. How much more so, when the 
mind is full of ten thousand diseases? Desiring eternal life in one 
body—how is it possible? 



32. Glimpses of the New Mind 


241 


All craving and aversion arise from delusion. By accumulating 
delusion instead of expelling it, you obscure your vision of the Tao. 
Thus, relinquish all desires and abide in nonexistence! Be placid, 
pure, and strong—then turn to observation! Whatever you loved 
before will now only cause weariness and disdain. 

Still, if you practice observation with a mind attached to pro¬ 
jected reality, you will never be aware of bad feelings in yourself. 
Only when your mind is utterly detached from projected reality can 
you observe the phenomenal world and truly understand right and 
wrong. In fact, you are just like a sobered man. Freshly awakened, 
he can now see the evil he did while he was drunk, deeds of which 
he was completely unconscious before. 

Thus the Scripture of Ascension to the Mystery says: “I uproot 
and cast off worldly life and give up the world completely.” [12a] 
And the Scripture of Western Ascension has: “Sight and hearing of 
eyes and ears keep you always in a state of tension. The joys of 
nose and mouth and all the other senses must be given up.” Even 
the Venerable Lord himself gave up the world and cast aside all 
ordinary life. 

Realize, then, that smell and taste have to be given up! They are 
nothing but a steady flow of craving and desires! How, thus liber¬ 
ated, could you ever think of the fishmonger’s shop as stinking? 


32. Glimpses of the New Mind 

The everyday activities of the newly emerging Taoist mind are 
already described, in a more humorous and literary form, in the 
ancient philosophers. Especially the Zhuangzi has quite a collec¬ 
tion of stories, rightfully famous, that describe the workings and 
intricacies of thinking with the Tao. 

In the six stories selected below from a variety of chapters, 
the boundaries of the ordinary mind are transcended. Whether 
one is human or an animal, whether one is dreaming or awake, 
whether one has feelings or remains unattached to all, whether 
one is better off alive or dead—all the various habitual patterns 
of reaction and classification of the common human mind are not 
only questioned but actively discarded and replaced with some¬ 
thing else. 

Taoist practitioners learn to understand their place in the world 
as part of the fate they brought with them, but they also realize 
that the common ways of dealing with the self and the world lead 



242 


Insight Practice 


to mechanical solutions and thus to a mechanical understanding 
that destroys the naturalness of life. Refusing the ways of the 
world, yet accepting her or his own being in it, the successful Taoist 
can remain untouched by the vicissitudes of life, can forget the 
world and go wandering off, free and easy, in the reaches of the 
Tao, in the origins and beginning of all. 

For translations of the Zhuangzi, see Watson 1968, Graham 
1981 and 1982. For discussions of the text, see Mair 1983, Allinson 
1990. 


Zhuangzi. Six stories from chapters 2, 5, 6, 12, 18, 21. 

One 


Once in the past, Zhuang Zhou dreamt that he was a butterfly, 
flitting and fluttering around, content with himself and doing what 
he leased. He didn’t know he was Zhuang Zhou. Suddenly he woke 
up. There he was, solid and clearly Zhuang Zhou. But he did not 
know whether, in fact, he was Zhuang Zhou who had dreamt he 
was a butterfly, or a butterfly now dreaming he was Zhuang Zhou. 
Between Zhuang Zhou and a butterfly there must be some distinc¬ 
tion! These are the different transformations of beings, (chap. 2) 

Two 


“Can a human being really be without feelings?” Huizi once 
asked Zhuangzi. 

“Indeed.” 

“But a person who has no feelings—how can you call him a 
human being?” 

“The Tao gave him a human face; heaven gave him a human 
body,” Zhuangzi said. “Why not call him human?” 

“But if you have already called him human, how can he be 
without feelings?” 

“That’s not what I mean by feelings. When I talk about having 
no feelings, what I say is that a person does not allow likes and 
dislikes to enter and harm himself Instead, he always follows the 
natural course of things and does not push life along.” 

“But—” Huizi hesitated. “If he never pushes life along, how 
does he keep himself alive?” 

“The Tao gave him a human face; heaven gave him a human 
body. He doesn’t let likes and dislikes enter and harm himself You, 
now—you place your spirit on the outside. You exhaust your es- 



32. Glimpses of the New Mind 


243 


sence, leaning on a tree and moaning, slumping at your desk and 
drifting off. Heaven picked out a human body for you, and you use 
it to gibber about sophistries!” (chap. 5). 

Three 

Master Chariot and Master Mulberry were friends. Once it 
rained for ten days without interruption. Master Chariot said to 
himself, “Master Mulberry will be feeling ill in this weather!” So he 
wrapped up some food and took it for his friend to eat. 

When he got to Master Mulberry’s door, he heard a sound, 
either singing or crying, while someone was plucking the zither: 

Father? 

Mother? 

Heaven? 

People? 

It was as though the voice would break any moment and the 
singer were rushing to finish the lines. 

Intrigued, Master Chariot entered. “What do you mean—sing¬ 
ing a song like that?” 

“I was thinking,” Master Mulberry answered. “What was it 
that brought me to this extreme poverty? Really, I couldn’t come up 
with an answer! For instance, my own father and mother—how 
could they wish me to be poor? Or beaven and eartb—they cover 
and support all without partiality. How could they be so partial 
toward me and make me poor? So I’ve been searching and search¬ 
ing to understand how this has come to pass, but I can’t find any 
answer. Still, I somehow got here, to the very extreme. It must be 
fate.” (cbap. 6) 

Four 

Zigong had been traveling in Chu in tbe south. On his way 
back he passed through the state of Jin. Walking by the south bank 
of the Han River, he saw an old man about to prepare bis vegetable 
plot for planting. 

The man had hollowed out an opening to enter the well. From 
there he emerged, carrying a heavy pitcher full of water, which he 
then poured over his plot. Grunting and puffing, he exerted much 
strength with only very little to show as a result. 

“There is a machine for this, “Zigong said to him. “In one day it 
can water a hundred such plots. It demands very little strength 
and yet has excellent results. Wouldn’t you like one?” 



244 


Insight Practice 


The gardener looked up and faced Zigong squarely. “How does 
it work?” 

“It’s a device made by chiseling a piece of wood. The back end 
is heavy, while its front is light. It heaves the water as though 
pouring it out, so fast that it seems to be boiling over! It is called a 
well sweep.” 

The gardener flushed with anger, then laughed derisively. “I 
have heard my teacher say,” he said with decision, “where there are 
machines, there inevitably are machine affairs; where there are 
machine affairs, there inevitably are machine minds. With a ma¬ 
chine mind in your breast, the pure and simple in your nature 
cannot develop. And when the pure and simple cannot develop, you 
won’t have any peace, in spirit or in life. Without peace in spirit 
and in life, the Tao will no longer support you. It’s not that I don’t 
know about your machine—I would be ashamed to use it!” 

Zigong blushed with chagrin, bent his head, and did not an¬ 
swer. After a while, the old gardener said, “Who are you, anyway?” 

“I am a disciple of Confucius.” 

“Oh! That means you are one of those who try to extend their 
learning in order to imitate the sages of old—always heaping non¬ 
sense on the common people, plucking the zither’s strings and wail¬ 
ing sad songs, hoping to sell your name to the world! 

“Really! You’d do better to forget your spirit and energy, drop 
off your body and bones! Then you might get along a bit! As it is, 
you can’t even control your own self—how can you presume to 
order the world! Be off with you, now! Don’t meddle with my busi¬ 
ness!” (chap. 12) 

Five 


Zhuangzi once went to Chu. On the way he saw a hollow old 
skull that looked all dried out and withered. Poking it with his 
horse whip, he talked to it. 

“Oh, well now, were you greedy in life and lost all reasonable 
measure, and thus ended here? Were you involved in the destruc¬ 
tion of your state or beheaded by an ax, and thus ended here? Did 
you behave unlawfully and were ashamed to cause your parents 
and family disgrace, and thus ended here? Did you suffer extreme 
cold and hunger, and thus ended here? Or did your springs and 
autumns just number so many that you ended here?” 

When he had flnished speaking, Zhuangzi pulled the skull to 
the side of the road. Using it for a pillow, he lay down and went to 
sleep. 



32. Glimpses of the New Mind 


245 


In the middle of the night, the skull appeared to him in a 
dream. 

“Your chatter is like that of a rhetorician,” it said to Zhuangzi. 
“When I look at what you say, it is just full of entanglements with 
the world of the living. In death, there are none of these! Would 
you like to hear about the dead?” 

“I’d be delighted,” Zhuangzi responded with enthusiasm. 

“Well,” the skull began, “among the dead, there is no ruler 
above and no minister below. Nor are there the labors of the four 
seasons. Free and easy, we take heaven and earth as our springs 
and autumns. You might even be a king facing south on his throne, 
yet you could not surpass this!” 

Zhuangzi did not believe a word. “Now wait,” he said. “Let’s 
say, I got the Department of Destiny to restore your body to you, to 
make you some bones and flesh, to return you to your parents and 
family, to give you back your old home and friends—wouldn’t you 
want that?” 

The skull frowned deeply and wrinkled its brow. “Why in all 
the heavens would I want to throw away the happiness of a king 
and go back to the toils of being human?” (chap. 18) 

Six 


Confucius called on Laozi. Laozi had just taken a bath and was 
sitting with his long white hair spread over his shoulders to dry. 
Utterly unmoving, he looked like a statue. Confucius, unseen, stood 
waiting. After a little while, he made himself known. 

“Dear me!” he exclaimed. “Did I see right? Was that really 
true? A moment ago your body and bones seemed rigid like a with¬ 
ered tree. You seemed to have forgotten the world, left humanity 
entirely, and were standing in absolute aloneness!” 

“Oh, yes, indeed,” Laozi agreed. “My mind was wandering in 
the beginning of all things.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“The mind may struggle for it, yet can never understand it. 
The mouth may twist itself for it, yet can never describe it. Still, 
this once, I will try to give you a general idea. 

“Perfect yin,” Laozi continued, “is stern and frigid. Perfect yang 
is bright and glittering. The stern and frigid comes from heaven. 
The bright and glittering develops from earth. As the two forces 
mix and join in harmony, living beings are born. 

“Perhaps there is something or someone who pulls the strings 
that hold it all together, but, if so, none has ever seen its form. 



246 


Insight Practice 


Things dissolve and develop, grow full and get empty, are dark 
one moment, bright the next; the sun rises and sets, the moon 
changes according to its phases—every day things proceed along 
their way, yet no one has ever seen the effort that underlies their 
movements. 

“Life arises from somewhere. Death returns someplace. Ending 
and beginning follow one another without interruption—yet no one 
knows their ultimate limits. If not like this—who would be the 
ancestor of it all?” 

“Hmm,” Confucius said thoughtfully. “I wonder, though, what 
it is like to wander around in this way?” 

“It means,” Laozi replied, “to attain perfect beauty and perfect 
happiness. Attain perfect beauty and wander around in perfect 
happiness, and you may be called a perfect one.” 

“How, pray, could I go about this?” 

“Well, beasts that feed on grass do not suffer from a change of 
pasture. Creatures that live in water do not suffer from a change of 
stream. They accept lesser changes without losing their overall 
constancy. Like that, don’t let joy and anger, grief and happiness 
enter your breast! 

“Now, all the myriad beings under heaven have an underlying 
oneness. Attain this One and become one with it! Then your four 
limbs and hundred bones will just be so much dust and sweepings. 
Life and death, beginning and end will be a mere day and night to 
you. Nothing whatsoever can confound you—how much less the 
trifles of gain or loss, good or bad fortune! 

“Someone may discard his servants as if they were so much 
earth or mud, for he knows himself worthier than the servants. 
Worth lies within yourself and should not be lost due to external 
changes. Therefore, observe that the myriad transformations of the 
world continue to change without even the trace of a limit! How 
could they ever distress your mind? 

“As one who practices the Tao you will certainly understand all 
this!” 

“Your virtue, sir,” Confucius said, deeply impressed, “is a true 
match to heaven and earth. Yet even you learn from perfect words 
and cultivate your mind. Who, then, even among the lords of old, 
could ever have been truly free?” 

“No, indeed!” Laozi exclaimed. “The murmuring of the flowing 
water is its natural talent, something it does in non-action. One 
who is similar has a relation to virtue that does not need cultiva- 



32. Glimpses of the New Mind 


247 


tion. It is so strong that beings cannot separate him from it. It is as 
natural to him as heaven is naturally high, as earth is naturally 
lo\v, as the sun and the moon are naturally bright. What is there to 
be cultivated?” (chap. 21) 



Chapter Nine 


ECSTATIC EXCURSIONS 


Ecstatic excursions are spirit trips into the otherworld. Adepts 
prepare themselves with purifications and ritual measures, chant 
specific incantations and visualize the perfected. Then they haul 
their souls out of their body and ecstatically ascend into the higher 
reaches of the universe. 

Taoist ecstatic excursions are a formalized development of the 
spirit travel of the shamans of old. Shamans are people who can 
easily traverse the gap between the worlds of the seen and the 
unseen, the human and the divine. They undergo specific initiatory 
rites and receive detailed instructions on the structure and organi¬ 
zation of the otherworld. Then they open themselves to the spir¬ 
its—and either the gods come to them, in forms of possession, or 
they go out to the gods, in a spirit journey. 

Shamanistic practices are documented in one form or another 
in all parts of the world. Although the classical case. Central Asia 
as described by Mircea Eliade, has not been known before the 
nineteenth century, the techniques and cosmologies associated with 
shamanism are thought to be very old. In ancient China, the phe¬ 
nomenon is clearly present in the Warring States and Han periods. 
Opinions about its importance in Chinese neolithic and bronze-age 
cultures (Xia and Shang dynasties) differ. 

In Taoism, the shamanistic practice of spirit journeys to the 
otherworld is linked with the concrete journeys emperors of old 
made through their realm. By imperial circuit to all parts of the 
world, the rulers established their power. They made their pres¬ 
ence felt and at the same time acquainted themselves with the far 
reaches of the world, collected marvels and received tributes. 

The circuit, whether through earth or through heaven, is thus 
a way of knowing and possessing all-there-is. It is a method of 
reaching out to the more wondrous parts of the world, of going 


249 



250 


Ecstatic Excursions 


beyond the known and reaching into the unknown, of leaving the 
common world behind and attaining the position of the Tao. 

The Tao in this context is localized. It is a place beyond all 
known regions, a place that is both deepest darkness, usually asso¬ 
ciated with the north, and highest light, the power of the south. Yet 
however much the Tao is found in these locations, it is more. It is 
the ultimate center of all, everywhere and nowhere at the same 
time, the perfect nothingness and emptiness beyond, and yet deeply 
within all being. 

To attain the Tao through ecstatic excursions, the soul and 
spirit of the Taoist must be freed completely from the concerns of 
this world. Concentrating the mind and visualizing the gods, ad¬ 
epts make first acquaintance with the Tao in its statuary, imagin¬ 
able state. Observing reality and going along with the moving 
energies of the world, they then adapt themselves to the eternally 
transforming, forever changing nature of the Tao. This is a more 
subtle level, a deeper closeness to the Tao. By rising up completely 
beyond the world and ecstatically traversing the earth, the stars, 
and the heavens, adepts finally reach the center of the Tao, arrive 
on its homeground, find it in its most essential form. 

Journeys through the heavens are described either in poetry or 
in meditation instructions. They reach from the pre-Han into the 
modern period, never tiring to praise the mystery and delight of 
the worlds beyond. 

The selections below give a representative sample. There is 
first the most classical of all ecstatic journeys in Chinese religion 
and literature, the “Far-off Journey” (Yuanyou) of the Chuci (The 
Songs of Chu). A collection of semi-ritual songs, this work is among 
the foremost documents of shamanism in pre-Han China. Compiled 
by Qu Yuan, a poet from the south, the poems are roughly dated to 
the third century b.c.e. They are standard pieces of Chinese litera¬ 
ture and have strongly influenced poetry and song. 

Next, there is the Tianguan santu (Three Ways to Go Beyond 
the Heavenly Pass), a set of meditation instructions from the school 
of Highest Clarity dating from the fifth century. Here adepts are 
given detailed visualization patterns and incantations, with which 
they can induce the deities of the Dipper, the astral constellation 
that represents the center and therefore the Tao in the sky, to let 
them pass up and beyond the world. The key to the excursions here 
is the transfer of the adepts’ names from the registers of death into 
those of eternal life. 

Third, there is another set of Shangqing meditation instruc¬ 
tions, this time for the visualization of a jade maiden who will 



33. The Far-off Journey 


251 


deliver divine essences mouth to mouth and even descend to join 
the adept in intimate embrace. The text, the Xuanzhen jing jue 
(Scripture of the Mysterious Perfected) dates from the Tang dy¬ 
nasty and was revealed by the Queen Mother of the West. 

Fourth, then, there is an inner-alchemical vision of the ecstatic 
excursion. The immortal sleep exercises of the Taoist master Chen 
Tuan of the tenth century are famous for their length and power. 
They are outlined in his Taoist biography, written around the year 
1300. The Tao here is found in sleep, the sleep of the perfected, 
which is a form of frolicking about with the immortals. 


33. The Far-off Journey 

The “Yuanyou” (The Far-off Journey), from Chuci (The Songs of 
Chu), can be dated to the third century b.c.e.. It is ascribed to Qu 
Yuan, poet and official of South China, who drowned himself in sorrow 
when he was rejected by his overlord. His death is associated with the 
Dragon Boat festival and thus with the midsummer time, the “double 
five” (fifth day of the fifth month) of the Chinese calendar. 

In this poem, the poet describes a visionary journey that takes 
him from the sorrows and afflictions of his unhappy life on earth 
through various physical practices and concentration efforts into 
the realm of the gods and immortals. Not only one among them but 
a guest beyond the clouds, he soon turns into an emperor himself, 
commanding thousands of chariots and giving orders to the Rain 
God, Lord Wind and other celestials of high standing. Traversing 
the world in all the cardinal directions, he reaches the far ends and 
goes beyond, to finally find Clarity and the Great Beginning. 

For an annotated translation of the text, contained in a render¬ 
ing of the entire collection, see Hawkes 1959. For shamanism in 
the Chuci, see Waley 1955. On Qu Yuan and the traditions associ¬ 
ated with him, see Schneider 1980. 


“The Far-off Journey” (Yuanyou), from Chuci (The Songs of Chu) 

Saddened by the hardships of the common world. 

How I wish to rise up and travel ways far-off! 

My own strength is feeble; there is no support— 

What could I stride on to float up and away? 

Encountering nothing but foulness and defilement, 

I am alone and miserable—who could I talk to? 



252 


Ecstatic Excursions 


At night I lie restless, never sleeping, 

My soul roving about till the approach of dawn. 

Thinking of the infinity of heaven and of earth, 

I cry with the eternal toil of human life. 

People of the past I cannot reach; 

People of the future I will never know. 

Pacing with restlessness, I yearn to get away. 

Confused and close to madness, I long for the eternal. 

My mind goes wild, strays off without control; 

My heart melancholy, I am ever sadder. 

Then suddenly my spirit, off, never to come back. 

My body, like a withered tree, left behind alone. 

I look within, try to get back my grip. 

To find the place where life’s energy arises: 

All vastly empty and tranquil, there is serenity. 

Quietly in non-action, spontaneous truth is found. 

I hear how Master Redpine cleansed the world’s defilements 
And wish to follow the model he has left. 

Honoring the blessed virtue of the perfected, 

I admire all who in the past have become immortal. 

Taking off in a transformation, they were never seen. 

While still their name and nature continue on and on. 

Oh, how Fu Yue went to live among the stars! 

How Han Zhong succeeded to realize the One! 

Oh, for the body to slowly fade off in the distance— 

To leave the human crowd behind, to vanish so completely! 

Oh, to follow the flow of energy, rising ever upward— 

Swift as the spirit, wondrous as a ghost! 

To see the world get hazy, look back from far-off— 

All dazzling essence, flashing back and forth! 

Oh, to go away from all the dust to greater purity— 

Never to turn back to the old home! 

To escape all the afflictions and never fear again— 

None in the world knows how this truly is! 



33. The Far-off Journey 


253 


And here I am, afraid of the passing of the seasons, 

With every rising of the sun on its westward move. 

A subtle frost descends, sinking ever downward, 

I fear my fragrant freshness will fade all too soon. 

Oh, to leave it all for free and easy journey 
Through years eternal that will never end! 

Here, who would enjoy with me my remaining fragrance. 
Walk through the country air and share my depth with me? 

Gaoyang, my hero, is removed ever farther. 

Where will this life, so lonely, lead me to? 

Then again, as spring and autumn hurry. 

How can I always stay in my old home? 

The Yellow Emperor cannot become my model. 

But I can follow Jumping Wang to please myself 

So I eat the six energies and drink the nightly dew. 

Rinse my mouth with yang itself and swallow morning light. 
Guarding the purity of the spirit light within, 

I absorb essence and energy, drive out all that’s coarse. 

Wandering in the wake of the gentle wind, 

I reach the Southern Nest without a single stop. 

I meet with Master Wang and pause to speak to him. 

Inquire about the harmony and virtue of the One. 

“The Tao can only be received,” he says, 

“It never can be given. 

“So small that it has no within, 

“So big it has no bounds. 

“No twists at all inside your soul, 

“And it will come spontaneously. 

“Focus on energy and open up to spirit— 

“Let them grow in you at the midnight hour. 

“Wait for the Tao in emptiness, 

“Clear even of non-action. 

“All living species rise from this, 

“It is the Gate of Virtue.” 



254 


Ecstatic Excursions 


Having heard this precious teaching, I move on, 

Swiftly getting to wherever I am going. 

I meet the winged ones on Cinnabar Hill, 

Tarry in the old land of No-Death. 

In the morning I wash my hair in the Sun’s Own Valley; 
At night I rest at the Ninefold Yang. 

I sip the subtle fluid of the Flying Spring 

And hold the shining brightness of the Glittering Gem. 

My face, like jade, is flushed with radiant color; 

My pure essence is starting to grow strong. 

My solid body dissolving into softness. 

My spirit’s ever subtler and more unrestrained. 

How flne the flery virtue of the Southern Land! 

How lovely the winter blooming of the Cassia Tree! 

How desolate the mountains with no beasts upon them! 
How solitary the wilderness with not a single man! 

Holding to my sparkling soul, I climb to the empyrean; 
Clinging to the floating clouds, I ride up further high. 

I order heaven’s gate-keeper to open up the locks; 

Pushing the sacred portals wide, he lets me look ahead. 

I call upon the Rain God then to lead the onward way. 

Ask him to guide me to Great Tenuity. 

I reach the walls of Twofold Yang and the Imperial Palace, 
Meet the Week Star and inspect the Clear Metropolis. 

In the morning I set off from the Court of Heaven, 

Arrive at night already at the Subtle Village. 

Marshalling a whole ten thousand chariots, 

I rise with them in slow and grand procession. 

Harnessing eight dragons, coiling and in twists, 

I bear a cloudy banner flapping in the wind. 

I set up a bright standard, rainbow-made. 

Five colors dazzling, so variegated. 

The yoke-horses bow and toss their heads in splendor; 

The trace-horses arch and curve with pride. 



33. The Far-off Journey 


255 


Confusion reigns and mixed disorder, 

As the colorful and overflowing train sets out. 

I hold my reins, adjust my whip. 

Decide to go visit Goumang of the East. 

Crossing the Great Brightness, I wheel over to the right. 
Send Flying Wind to announce him our coming. 

Yang in its first gentle flashes, not quite bright. 

We ford the waters of the Pool of Heaven. 

The Lord Wind drives ahead of us. 

To blow the dust away, make all clear and cool. 

Phoenixes wing along, bearing up my pennant. 

As we pass Rushou, the Western Sovereign. 

I seize the Broom Star for a banner. 

And lift the Dipper’s Handle as my baton. 

Plunging and soaring, we go up and down. 

Wandering on the floating waves of unsteady mist. 

As the daylight fades into gathering darkness, 

I summon the Dark Warrior to join as our leader. 

The God of Literary Glory follows, marshalling the progress. 
Selecting all the gods for their different places. 

Far-off the road stretches, on and on. 

Carefully, stopping in places, we ascend to lofty heights. 

On my left the Rain God guides us on the way; 

On my right the Thunder God serves as bodyguard. 

Thus I go beyond the world, forget all about returning: 

My mind all unrestrained pushes up and away. 

Deep within so full of joy and spontaneous delight. 

Oh, how merry I am now, so perfectly happy! 

Traversing fresh blue clouds, I am floating freely. 

Yet suddenly I glimpse the old village down below. 

My groom homesick, my own heart full of sadness. 

Even the trace-horses look back—none would go any further. 



256 


Ecstatic Excursions 


Thinking of my dear old friends in my imagination, 

I heave a heavy sigh and brush the tears away. 

Slowly again I float, rising ever farther: 

Suppressing now my will, keeping myself controlled. 

I point to the God of Fire and gallop straight to him. 
Wishing to journey to the world’s southern end. 

I gaze on wilderness beyond all known directions. 

Float on and on over watery expanse. 

The Blessed Melter of the South stops me on the way. 

So I go back by phoenix and visit the River Consorts. 

They play the “Pool of Heaven” and sing me ‘To the Clouds” 
Both ladies then perform the Nine Songs of Shao. 

Asking the Xiang goddesses to play their zithers for me, 

I bid the Sea God dance with the River God. 

They pull up water monsters to step forward with them. 
Their bodies coiling and writhing in ever swaying motion! 

Gracefully the Lady Rainbow circles all around them; 

The phoenixes soar up, stay hovering above— 

The music swells ever higher, into infinity. 

At this point I leave to wander yet again; 

With my entourage, I gallop far away. 

At the world’s far end at the Gate of Coldness, 

I race the rushing wind to Clarity Springs. 

I follow Zhuanxu of the North over piled-up ice. 

Turn from my path to pass through Mystery Darkness. 

Striding on cosmic mainstays, I look back behind me. 
Summon Qian Lei the Creator to appear. 

To go in front of me on the level way. 

Thus I tour all four outlands. 

Traverse all the six regions. 

Up to the Cracks of Heaven, 

Down to the Great Abyss. 

Below just lofty openness, there is no more earth; 

Above just empty vastness, there is no more heaven. 



34. Trips through the Stars 


257 


I look but my vision blurs, nothing to be seen; 

I listen but my ears are numb, nothing to be heard. 

Going beyond non-action, I reach the Clarity, 
Become a neighbor of the Great Beginning. 


34. Trips through the Stars 

In Highest Clarity Taoism, the ecstatic journey serves to newly 
integrate self and Tao, body and cosmos on a higher level. From an 
ordinary human, with the travel to the otherworld, a fully cosmicized 
being emerges. Practitioners increasingly make the heavens their 
true home, wander freely through the far ends of the universe, and 
gain control not only over their own life and death but over the 
transformations of the cosmos at large. 

The practice is highly formalized and begins with purifications 
and prayers. It includes incantations to the various gods, mostly 
those of the Dipper, the ruling constellation of the center, asking 
them to convey the adept to the heavenly regions, delete his name 
from the registers of death and make him a full resident among the 
celestials. 

The text translated here, Tianguan santu (Three Ways to Go 
Beyond the Heavenly Pass), is found in DZ 1366, fasc. 1040. The 
first twelve pages are rendered, short in text due to the numerous 
illustrations. 

For more on ecstatic excursions in Highest Clarity Taoism, see 
Robinet 1979, 1989. On the stars and their role, see Schafer 1977. 
For a more general discussion of ecstatic practice and shamanism 
in Taoist mysticism, see Kohn 1992. 


Tianguan santu (Three Ways to Go Beyond the Heavenly Pass) 

[la] To practice the Tao of excursions to the seven stars [of the 
Dipper], first summon the Jade Emperor and his nine lords and let 
their mysterious essence radiate within your body. Block off the 
root of death, calm your mind, and darken the room. Let neither 
wind nor dust disturb you, but in solitude face the other realm. 

Watch carefully for the first glimmer of sunrise, then burn 
incense on your right and left sides, scatter the smoke and let it 
form a cloud in the courtyard. Concentrate your mind and make a 
strong effort to control your thoughts. Visualize the gods in cre¬ 
ative imagination, but do not fall asleep. 



258 


Ecstatic Excursions 



Fig. 25. Invoking the Celestials. Source: Tianguan santu. 


Practice this for seven years; then a jasper carriage with a 
flying canopy and cinnabar shafts will come to receive you and take 
you to ascend through the Heavenly Pass. 

The route of blocking death is to the northeast; the route of 
entering the registers of life is to the south. Immortals call them 
the way of hard attainment and the truth of easy descent. Once 
you have a golden tablet and jade name for yourself, you will attain 
the full power of this Tao. 

Practice in particular on the days renyin, bingyin, jiazi, jiawu, 
xinwei, and xinchou [i.e., days 1, 3, 8, 31, 38, and 39 of the 60-day 
cycle], since these are the times of highest harmony, [lb] The Jade 
Emperor always gives orders to his immortals-in-attendance and to 
the jade lads on these days. Also, at those times, he examines and 
decides on the golden tablets, jade names, and registers of all stu- 



































34. Trips through the Stars 


259 


dents of immortality, which are kept in the Eastern Palace of Green 
Florescence. Therefore, practice with a determined will on these 
days in particular, applying yourself with utmost penetration and 
strong impulse. 

The Jade Emperor is the overlord of the Northern Emperor 
who resides in the Six Palaces [of the dead] at Fengdu. He is the 
chief authority that can eliminate your name from the registers of 
death. 

You can have your name recorded in the registers of life at the 
Gate of Humanity. You can traverse the seven stars after passing 
through the Gate of Demons. And you can go beyond the mysteri¬ 
ous pivot of the universe by opening the Heavenly Pass. 

In all cases, first undertake purifications and fasts, make an 
effort to control your thoughts, and focus your mind firmly on the 
mystery. Close your eyes and visualize the gods within. Clap your 
teeth thirty-six times. 

First, meditate on the Great Star. This is Yang Brightness of 
Mystery Pivot, the spirit soul and spirit of the Heavenly Pivot. 
Here the Nine Lords of Highest Mystery reside. 

They wear robes of flying-cloud brocade; on their heads they 
have the caps of mysterious morning light. They descend from the 
center of the Dipper and enter your body. 

Now recite; 

Oh, Yang Brightness of Mystery Pivot! 

Spirit Soul and Spirit of the Heavenly Pivot! 

Oh, Nine Lords of Highest Mystery! 

Merge and transform into one single spirit! [2a] 

Cut off my route to death at the Gate of Demons! 

Open my registers of life in the Southern Office! 

Let my seven souls be free from the three bad rebirths! 

Let me come to life again as an immortal! 

Let me traverse the sevenfold essence to reach mysterious 
darkness! 

Let me bodily go beyond all through the Heavenly Pass! 

Exhale deeply twenty-seven times. 

Continue this practice without slackening; then you will be 
invited up to heaven as a guest of the Jade Emperor, or the celestials 
themselves will come down to you on a cloud of purple haze. You 
will be guarded by jade maidens of gleaming efflorescence and by 



260 


Ecstatic Excursions 


jadelads of radiant sunlight. Twelve maidens and lads will be your 
attendants. 

[2b] Next, meditate on the second star, the Prime Star. This is 
Yin Essence of Northern Womb, the spirit soul and spirit of the 
Celestial Jade. Here the Nine Lords of Highest Jade reside. 

They wear flying skirts of yellow brocade; on their heads they 
have caps of mysterious morning light. They descend from the cen¬ 
ter of the Dipper and enter your body. 

Exhale and recite: 

Oh, Yin Essence of Northern Womb! 

Spirit Soul and Spirit of the Celestial Jade! 

Oh, Nine Lords of Highest Jade! 

Merge and transform ten thousand times into one single 
spirit! 

Delete all my yang sins from the registers of Great Yin! 

Transfer all my yin energy into the Realm of Great Yang! [3a] 

Let me traverse the seven stars to cut off death! 

Let me open up the six harmonies at the Heavenly Pass! 

Let me free my ancestors for seven generations from the 
three bad rebirths! 

Let us all come back to life in the Southern Palace! 

Exhale deeply twenty-seven times. 

[3b] Third, meditate on the True Star. This is the Highest True 
One of Ninefold Ultimate, the Lady of the Upper Prime. It is the 
material soul and essence of the Heavenly Pearl. Here the Nine 
Lords of Highest Simplicity reside. 

They wear flying robes of green brocade; on their heads they 
have caps of mysterious morning light. They descend from the cen¬ 
ter of the Dipper and enter your body. 

Exhale and recite: 

Oh, Highest True One of Ninefold Ultimate! 

Lady of the Upper Prime! 

Material Soul and Essence 
Of Heavenly Pearl and Celestial Jade! 

Oh, Nine Lords of Highest Simplicity! 



34. Trips through the Stars 


261 



Fig. 26. Reaching Out to the Deities of the Dipper. Source: Tianguan santu. 


Merge and transform ten thousand times into one single 
spirit! 

Eradicate all roots of my old karma! 

Cut off the source of the death for me! [4a] 

Let my eyes be bright and of penetrating vision! 

Let them mirror everything without end! 

Let me communicate with the truth of the mystery! 

Let its essence flow into my body! 








262 


Ecstatic Excursions 


Let me reach out to the august Dipper’s handle! 

Let me fly all the way across its seven stars! 

Let me stride on light and ride on air! 

Let me end only in time with heaven itself! 

Exhale deeply twenty-seven times. 

[4b] Fourth, meditate on the Pivotal Star. This is Mystery Dark¬ 
ness of Jade Pearl, the spirit soul and essence of the Heavenly 
Pillar. Here the Nine Lords of Highest Emptiness reside. 

They wear flying robes of purple brocade; on their heads they 
have caps of mysterious morning light. They descend from the cen¬ 
ter of the Dipper and enter your body. 

Exhale and recite; 

Oh, Mystery Darkness of Jade Pearl! 

Spirit Soul and Essence of the Heavenly Pillar! 

Oh, Nine Lords of Highest Emptiness! 

Merge and transform ten thousand times into one single 
spirit! 

Let me safely go beyond the seven stars! 

Block of the Gate of Demons! 

Cut out all my energy of death! 

Open wide the Heavenly Pass for me! [5a] 

Let me traverse the Northern Dipper from the Mysterious 
Pivot! 

Let me pass beyond life’s energy to the west-power of the 
Earth! 

Let me leave the Northern Emperor behind on Mount 
Fengdu! 

Let me register my name forever in the Southern Office! 

Exhale deeply twenty-seven times. 

[5b] Fifth, meditate on the Net Star. This is Cinnabar Prime of 
Heavenly Peace, the spirit soul and numinous power of the Jade 
Beam. Here the Nine August Lords of Highest Mystery reside. 

They wear flying robes of cinnabar brocade; on their heads 
they have caps of mysterious morning light. They descend from the 
center of the Dipper and enter your body. 

Exhale and recite: 



34. Trips through the Stars 


263 


Oh, Cinnabar Prime of Heavenly Peace! 

Spirit Soul and Numinous Power of the Jade Beam! 

Oh, Nine August Lords of Highest Mystery! 

Merge and transform ten thousand times into one single 
spirit! 

Bring the essence of the seven stars. 

So it freely descends into my body! [6a] 

Let it revolve three and four times. 

So the Seven Primes be opened! 

Let me seal off the gate of death in the northeast! 

Let me receive the hall of life in ninefold mystery! 

Let me register my name forever in the Eastern Flower 
Palace! 

Let me become an attendant on the Jade Lord of Morning 
Light! 

Exhale deeply twenty-seven times. 

[6b] Sixth, meditate on the Mainstay Star. This is North Culmen 
of Destiny Pivot, the spirit soul and numinous power of Open Yang. 
Here the Nine Lords of Highest Cinnabar and August Emptiness 
reside. 

They wear flying robes of vermilion brocade; on their heads 
they have caps of mysterious morning light. They descend from the 
center of the Dipper and enter your body. 

Exhale and recite: 

Oh, North Culmen of Destiny Pivot! 

Spirit Soul and Numinous Power of Open Yang! 

Oh, Nine Lords of Highest Cinnabar and August Emptiness! 
Merge and transform ten thousand times into one single 
spirit! 

Open the Mysterious Gate of Heavenly Unity 
Above at Triple Charter! [7a] 

Transfer me past the Six Palaces of the Northern Emperor 
Below at Mount Fengdu! 

Let me govern and control all the officials of Darkness! 

Let me exterminate the roots of all nine kinds of death! 



264 


Ecstatic Excursions 


Let me revolve the three stars and return to the four! 

Let me transfer my name to the seven primes! 

Let me forever preserve myself without end! 

Let me be as old as the Dipper is itself! 

Exhale deeply twenty-seven times. 

[7b] Last, meditate on the Passgate Star. This is the Heavenly 
Pass of Mysterious Yang, the great brightness of Vacillating Radi¬ 
ance. Here the Tao Lords of the Highest Jade Emperor reside. 

They wear flying gauze robes of cinnabar brocade; on their 
heads they have caps of mysterious morning light. They descend 
from the center of the Dipper and enter your body. 

Exhale and recite: 

Oh, Heavenly Pass of Mysterious Yang! 

Great Brightness of Vacillating Radiance! 

Oh, Tao Lords of the Highest Jade Emperor! 

Merge and transform ten thousand times into one single 
spirit! 

Summon the Morning Emperor above. 

The Ninefold Perfect Lord! 

Let me leave the Ninefold Darkness and Deep Chaos 

Through the Heavenly Pass! [8a] 

Let me liberate my ancestors for seven generations! 

Let me float freely through the clouds of mystery! 

Let me dissolve all roots of death in the Dark North! 

Let me register my name in the jade records of the Eastern 
Flower Palace! 

Exhale deeply twenty-seven times. 

[10b] Note: In the illustrations found in this volume, unless 
speciflcally mentioned otherwise, all perfected personages should 
be imagined wearing blue caps, red capes, pink robes, and dark red 
shoes. They all stand on five-colored clouds. For purposes of visual¬ 
ization, think of the perfected as wearing blue caps, yellow robes, 
green capes, and having a fresh youthlike countenance. In addition, 
the interior of halls and palaces should be imagined as golden in color 
and furnished with suitable decorations and ornamentations. 



33. The Far-off Journey 


265 


The Method of Going Beyond Death through the Northern 
Emperor of the Six Palaces on Mount Fengdu 

Mount Fengdu is located in the North, in the position of the 
celestial stem gui. Therefore the Northeast is known as the Gate of 
Demons \gui], the root of the energy of death. The mountain is 
2,600 miles high and 30,000 miles in circumference. [11a] Its grotto 
heaven begins right beneath the mountain; it measures 15,000 
miles in circumference. 

Above and below, there are palaces and residences of demons 
and spirits. On top of the mountain are the Six Palaces, with an¬ 
other set of them deep inside the grotto. Each palace is about 1,000 
miles in size. They are the palaces of the demons and spirits of the 
Six Heavens. 


First, there is the Dark Heavenly Palace of Infamy and 
Death; 

Next, there is the Ancestral Heavenly Palace Where All 
Faithfulness is Killed; 

Third, there is the Military Heavenly Palace Where Even the 
Morning Light Has to Endure Offenses; 

Fourth, there is the Heavenly Palace of Thoroughly Shining 
Energy of Guilt; 

Fifth, there is the Heavenly Palace of the Seven Misdeeds of 
the Ancestors’ Souls; 

Last, there is the Heavenly Palace of Frequently Repeated 
Presumptions of Office. 


The Six Palaces are governed by the Northern Emperor. They 
are the Six Heavens of the demons and the ghosts of the dead. 
Here the institution that governs people’s death is located, [lib] In 
all cases, a death summons is issued at these Six Palaces on Mount 
Fengdu. 

For this reason, the Emperor of Heaven often delivers all those 
who pursue life and practice excursions to the seven stars to the 
realm beyond the Heavenly Pass. For them, he opens the Palace of 
Life at the South Culmen and seals off the Gate of Death in the 
Northeast. 

After you have completed the visionary excursion [to the Six 
Palaces], clap your left teeth nine times and call out the names of 
the Six Palaces. Then recite the following incantation: 



266 


Ecstatic Excursions 



I am a minister of the Lord Emperor of Heaven. 

My name is registered in Jade Clarity. 

From there on down to the Six Heavens, 

To all the demon palaces of the Northern Emperor, 

All realms are under my control. 

They are all part of my jurisdiction— 

How would any demon dare to go on living there? 

Watch out! 

On the right of my belt, I carry the talisman Easy Fall! 
On the left, I have the talisman Fire Bell! 

I can throw fire as far as ten thousand miles! 

I can awe and control as many as ten thousand souls! 

Any criminal will at once be executed! 

Any offender will at once be punished! 

Whenever the Lord Emperor has an order, 

I will immediately hasten to carry it out! 


This concludes the exercise. 








35. Divine Loves 


267 


If you recite this incantation only once, the radiance of heaven 
will be startled into action and the myriad evil specters will be 
captivated and bound. If you recite it three times, all demons and 
calamitous forces will be destroyed and the names of the dead will 
be taken from the registers of the Six Heavens. Then the Heavenly 
Pass will open, and people will come back to life in the palace of the 
South Culmen. 

[12a] You can study the Tao without learning the names of the 
palaces on Mount Fengdu where the demons and spirits of the 
dead reside. However, in that case you will not properly seal off the 
root of death. Even if you continue to practice for ten thousand 
years, you will not succeed in becoming immortal. Only with this 
can the excursion to the seven stars be concluded properly! 

35. Divine Loves 

The complementary form to ecstatic excursions into the heav¬ 
ens and palaces of the otherworld is the ecstatic, frequently sexual, 
encounter with gods descending to this level of existence. 

Going back far in Chinese history, intimate meetings with gods 
and goddesses were sought after fervently by the shamans of old, 
as several songs in the Chuci (Songs of Chu) document. Here as in 
Taoism later, the practitioner purifies himself or herself, sets up a 
proper sacred space, adorns his or her body, and entices the deity to 
descend with melodious incantations and seductive dances. The 
lover comes, the union is attained, but after a sojourn forever too 
short the deity returns to the heavenly abodes. The human lover 
left behind is full of sadness and longing, praying for another chance 
at such a divine encounter. 

In Highest Clarity, the ancient shamanistic practice is turned 
into a formal meditation procedure. Adepts visualize the pure en¬ 
ergy of the sun or the moon, then imagine a goddess in its midst. 
The goddess grows stronger and more vivid with prolonged practice 
until she is felt present in the flesh. Pressing her mouth to his, she 
dispenses celestial vapors to increase the adept’s vitality. After a 
long courtship and regularly repeated visualizations, she will even 
lie with him. 

The technical meditation instructions combined with the songs 
of the shamans of old were continued in Tang poetry. Here Taoist 
priestesses express their desire for an ecstatic meeting with a di¬ 
vine lover; seekers of the Tao spend their nights in temples willing 
a divine maiden to join them on their mat; poets sing of the union’s 
delight and sorrow at the parting. 



268 


Ecstatic Excursions 


The text translated here, the Shangqing mingtang xuanzhen 
jing jue (Scripture of the Mysterious Perfected from the Hall of 
Light of Highest Clarity, with Practical Instructions) is among the 
technical manuals of Highest Clarity, dating probably from the 
Tang dynasty. It is found in DZ 424, fasc. 194 and contains a 
variety of different methods for the ingestion of celestial energies. 
The love encounter is described in the beginning (la-4b). 

A translation of the technical instructions with ample annota¬ 
tion is found in Schafer 1978. For sexual encounters of shamans 
and goddesses in ancient China, see Hawkes 1974. Translations of 
Tang poetry on the same topic are found in Cahill 1985, Schafer 
1978a. For more ecstatic poetry of the same period, see Schafer 
1981 and 1985. 


Shangqing mingtang xuanzhen jing jue (Scripture of the 
Mysterious Perfected from the Hall of Light of Highest Clarity, 
with Practical Instructions) 

[la] The Greatly Perfected Goddess of the Nine Numina of the 
White-Jade Tortoise Terrace, the Queen Mother of the West, gave 
us the Scripture of the Mysterious Perfected from the Hall of Light. 
It runs: 


All Highest, Full of Mystery, 

Where the two energies pervade their brilliance— 

The Mysterious Perfected radiates within. 

The Hall of Light spreads clarity without. 

Swallow the essence of the two luminants. 

So spirit and essence live forever. 

Rise up to aid the Ruler of Fates; 

Inspect and control the myriad numina on earth. 

Your six fluorescences full to overflowing. 

You penetrate to see the yellow repose of all. 

These forty characters were carved by the Highest Lord on the 
southern railing of Phoenix Terrace. Only disciples of the assembled 
perfected can ever receive them in teaching; only those listed with 
the Ruler of Fates can ever receive them in transmission. 



35. Divine Loves 


269 


The Practice of the Mysterious Perfected 

Visualize the sun or the moon in your mouth, [lb] 

During bright daylight, visualize the sun. 

In the depth of night, visualize the moon. 

When it is neither day nor night, visualize either. 

But make a clear distinction between them. 

The color of the sun is red. 

The color of the moon is yellow. 

The sun has nine rays of purple light. 

The moon has ten rays of white light. 

[2a] Make the sun or the moon stand right in front of your 
mouth, about nine feet away. The rays of their light should be 
directed straight toward your mouth so they can easily enter. 

Now visualize a young lady in the sun or the moon. On her 
head she is wearing a purple cap; her cloak and skirt are of vermil¬ 
ion brocade. She calls herself Jade Maiden of Cinnabar Morning 
Light of Greatest and Highest Mystery. Her taboo name is Binding 
Coil, and she is also known as the Secret Perfected. 

From her mouth she now emits a red energy, which fills the 
space between the light rays of the sun or the moon. See how the 
light rays merge and combine with the morning light of the Jade 
Maiden. When they have amalgamated completely, let them enter 
your mouth. 

[2b] Hold on to the light and swallow it; then visualize the 
Jade Maiden emit another stream of light. Practice this nine times 
ten, then stop. 

Now visualize the Jade Maiden and order the luminants of 
either the sun or the moon to press intimately on your face. Make 
the Jade Maiden press her mouth tightly upon your own, and allow 
her energy fluids to enter deeply into you. 

Softly utter the following incantation: [3a] 

Oh, Purple Perfected of Great Empyrean, 

Hidden Goddess of the Hall of Light! 

Oh, Living Essence of the Sun and the Moon, 

Binding Coil, Jade Maiden! 

Oh, goddess born prior even to emptiness. 

Known as the Secret Perfected! 



270 


Ecstatic Excursions 


Your head is crowned by purple radiance, 

A numinous cap of lotus leaves. 

Your body is wrapped in a brocade cloak, 

A flying skirt of vermilion cinnabar. 

Oh, come out of the sun and enter the moon. 

You celestial light of enchanting fragrance! 

May your mouth emit red energy— 

Oh, let it drip into my Three Primes! 

May my face gaze upon the Well of Heaven, 

Softer become my spirit soul, strong my material parts. 

May the mysterious fluid come floating to me 
And the embryo essence within grow to completion! 

May my five orbs within develop florescence! 

May my pupils be open to look back inside! 

May I inspect and control the myriad spirits! 

May I be a flying immortal near the Ruler of Fates! 

Following this incantation, visualize the mouth of the Jade 
Maiden spouting forth salival fluid. Let it flow into your own mouth. 
Then rinse with this fluid and swallow it. Perform this ninety times, 
then stop. 

Once this is accomplished, just calm your mind and open your 
thoughts. At this point you can perform the practice frequently, no 
longer subject to various limitations. 

[3b] However, make sure that as long as you visualize the 
moon, you do not work on the sun, and vice versa. At the same 
time, see that you visualize them both in equal measure and at 
their proper times. 

If you do not meet the proper time for ingestion [of the celestial 
energy], then visualize the two luminants take up residence in 
your Hall of Light. The sun on the left, the moon on the right, let 
their radiance and brilliance merge to radiate out of the pupils of 
your eyes. Let their two energies shine forth into the four direc¬ 
tions and penetrate your entire being in free flow. 

Then again, you can also visualize the sun and the moon in 
your Hall of Light on a regular basis and without waiting to ingest 
the energy of either. Doing so, you can make use of their combined 
power. 



36. Ecstatic Sleep 


271 


[4a] Practice this for five years, and the Jade Maiden of Great¬ 
est Mystery will descend to you and lie down to share your mat. 
The Jade Maiden might even divide her shape for you into a host of 
like jade maidens who will serve your every whim. 

This is due to the proper accordance of impulses, to the right 
combination of essences. It is the pure transformation of life, the 
essential vision of the true inner forms of all. 

With this you have reached the perfect state of superior es¬ 
sence, the wondrous response to the divine impulse. 

The perfected officers on high have developed this method of 
the sun’s morning light and the practice involving the two luminants 
in order to allow human beings to pervade the universal numen 
and reach utter perfection. People with this practice can embody 
pure life and develop a jade-like glow. 

[4b] With this you can command the myriad spirits and ascend 
to the halls of the emperor-on-high. 


36. Ecstatic Sleep 

“Sleep” exercises are a meditation that is practiced lying down. 
Popular since the Song, it is specifically used to circulate and re¬ 
vert energy according to the rules of inner alchemy. 

Practitioners should first sit cross-legged and clap their teeth, 
then summon the gods in the body. Once concentration is thus 
established, they lie down on their side, either right or left, with 
their hands forming particular positions (mudras) of protection and 
with one leg bent slightly under the other. Further instructions 
include to close the mouth, lower the eyelids, and press the tip of 
the tongue against the upper palate. 

Once in the right position, the various gateways of energy 
within the body are opened while those to the outside are firmly 
closed. Then the energies of the fire and water trigrams, the dragon 
and tiger, lead and mercury are circulated, leading eventually to 
the creation of an immortal embryo who in turn can ascend to the 
heavens. While the young one frolics about, the body of the practi¬ 
tioner lies in suspended animation. 

Chen Tuan (died 989) was a Taoist master of the Five Dynas¬ 
ties and early Song who resided for most of his life on Huashan, 
the western sacred mountain. He is well known for his 
prognosticatory skills, his Yijing exegesis, and his months-long sleep 



272 


Ecstatic Excursions 


practice. Inspiring many schools and traditions, he was later linked 
not only with various forms of inner alchemy and Qigong practice, 
but also with the development of Neo-Confucianism, in particular 
with Zhou Dunyi’s “Diagram of the Great Ultimate.” 

The text below describes his sleep experiences according to the 
biography contained in the Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian (Comprehen¬ 
sive Mirror Through the Ages of Perfected Immortals and Those Who 
Embody the Tao). This work, found in DZ 296, fasc. 139-48 (47.9a- 
11a) is among the most extensive works on the lives of the immortals. 
It was compiled by Zhao Daoyi (fl. 1294-1307) around the year 1300. 

For a discussion of Chen Tuan, his life and legend, see Knaul 
1981, Kohn 1990a. On Chen Tuan’s role in the development of Neo- 
Confucianism, see Li 1990. For his later legends, including a trans¬ 
fer to Japan and involvement with the Huangbo (Obaku) school of 
Zen, see Russell 1990, 1990a. For more on sleep exercises, see their 
discussion in the Ming-dynasty manual Chifeng sui (The Marrow 
of the Red Phoenix), translated in Takehiro 1990 and Despeux 1988. 


“The Sleep of the Perfected,” from the Biography of Chen 
Tuan, Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian (Comprehensive Mirror 
Through the Ages of Perfected Immortals and Those Who 
Embody the Tao) 

[9a] From time to time. Master Chen walked around the moun¬ 
tain and down into the villages. To this day, there are people who 
have met him. Also there still are the monastery and residence of 
the Master in the western part of the Huashan range. 

In the old days, the Master used to hike around much with a 
villager by the name of Cui Gu. Once a young monk by the name of 
Jin Li, who also spent his time hiking around sacred mountains, 
came to see Cui Gu. 

“I would like to come along when you go to see Master Xiyi one 
of these days.” 

“Please be patient for a little while,” Gu answered. “The Mas¬ 
ter is currently deep in sleep. You can meet him as soon as he 
comes out of it.” 

“When will this be?” 

“There is no way of telling, maybe in half a year, maybe in 
three or four months. The Master hasn’t even rested for a single 
month yet. So, if you have anything else to do in the meanwhile or 
any other places to visit, please do so and come back here later.” 



36. Ecstatic Sleep 


273 


Thereupon Li left and only returned to Mount Hua after more 
than a year. He went to see Gu and was admitted to join him in a 
visit of the Master. Entering together, they bowed deeply. Li greeted 
the Master with utmost reverence. 

He then addressed him: “I have ventured before to come to 
Mount Hua. My heart ached to meet you. But at that time you 
were deep in sleep and had not yet woken up. May I ask: Does the 
sleep also have Tao? [9b] If you would please be so kind as to 
instruct me in this matter and illuminate me in things unfathom¬ 
able to my poor brain!” 

The Master made a noise that sounded like laughter, squared 
his shoulders, pulled up his legs into a cross-legged posture, and let 
his dignified countenance relax. 

“There is no need for you to be anxious or worried. It is like 
this. In the rhythm of activity and rest that governs our everyday 
life one cannot but know desires. It is very difficult to be liberated 
from life and death, to step outside of the wheel of rebirth. 

“An ordinary person eats to satiation and then takes plenty of 
rest. He or she is mainly worried that the food should not be too 
rich, eating when he feels hungry and sleeping when he feels tired. 
His snore is audible all over the place. Yet, then, at night, when he 
should be sound asleep, he wakes up unaccountably. This is be¬ 
cause fame and gain, sounds and sights agitate his spirit and con¬ 
sciousness; sweet wine and fried mutton muddle his mind and will. 
This is the sleep of ordinary folk. 

But I practice the sleep of the perfected. 

Store up the breath of gold and drink the juice of jade. 

I lock the golden gate within, so it cannot be opened; 

I close the door of earth inside, so it can not be broken. 

The green dragon guards the Eastern Palace; 

The white tiger stands before the Western Hall. 

Perfected energy circulates in my Pond of Cinnabar, 

And spirit water revolves around my five inner orbs. 

I call the gods of jia and ding to adjust the time; 

I summon all the hundred spirits to guard the inner chamber. 

[10a] 

Then my spirit 

Leaves to ascend to the Nine Palaces above. 

Frolics in the sky’s azureness; 



274 


Ecstatic Excursions 


With it, I step on emptiness as if on solid ground, 

Rise up as easy as if falling down. 

Imperceptibly, I float around with the gentle winds; 

Whirling, I appear with the easy-going clouds. 

Sitting quiet, I reach the purple realm of Mount Kunlun; 

With ease I pass through lucky places and the grotto 
heavens. 

I inhale the flowery essence of the sun and moon; 

I sport in the wondrous landscape of vapors and of haze. 

I visit the perfected and discuss the principles beyond; 

I join immortals and we go off to visit far strange lands. 

As I see the green sea turning into soil, 

I point at yin and yang and yell with exultation. 

Delighted, I wish to return: 

My feet step on clear wind. 

My body floats on rays of light— 

This is perfected sleep! 

“Not knowing the movements of the year-star and the moon, 
how can one be saddened by the changes and alterations of the 
affairs of this world? Since you so politely asked me, I will summa¬ 
rize the gist of perfected sleep in a poem: 

In eternal sleep 
The world is energy. 

The soul all gone. 

No movement in the body. 

Coming back to consciousness — where is there a self? 

I wish my mind to wander once again 
And laugh about the grimy world of dust. 

How can I ever know that I am really there? 

“Another good way of putting it is as follows [10b]: 

Superior beings do not dream; 
they sport with the immortals. 

The perfected never sleep; 
they float up with the clouds. 



36. Ecstatic Sleep 


275 


@) J/r fJI'l ^ r4l 



Fig. 28. Master Chen Practices Ecstatic Sleep. Source: Chifeng 
sui. 


A cauldron full of drugs brings eternal life; 

A hollow gourd contains a whole new world. 
You want to know what is in sleep and dream? 
It’s well the highest mystery among men! 




276 


Ecstatic Excursions 


Thus, great dreams have great awakening; 

Small dreams have only small. 

Sleep the sleep of all that is perfection; 

Dream the dreams of wide eternity— 

None are there at all that would be of this world!” 

This concluded his instructions. “I will sleep again shortly,” the 
Master said. “If you do not have any other plans, please do not 
hesitate to come again in a few days and I will show you a practical 
example.” 

With this the Master left. 

Li was dumbfounded like a block of wood. He felt as if he was 
waking from a state of deep intoxication. He had no idea how he 
managed to finally stumble out of the door. 

Ultimately he returned to his lodgings and in due course came 
back to see the Master again. This time the Master discussed the 
secret ways of nourishing life with him and expounded the con¬ 
cepts of perfect wonder. He thereby clarified the profound prin¬ 
ciples of Great Mystery. 

He ended by saying: “On that and that day, I will sleep again. 
Please come to see me then.” 

Li came on the appointed day. When he arrived he found the 
Master already asleep. He noticed that he slept while lying flat on 
his back, no inhalation or exhalation of breath was perceptible, and 
yet his face showed a rosy and radiantly healthy complexion. [11a] 
Li paid respects before the bed and went on his way. 



Part Four 


IMMORTALITY 



Chapter Ten 


IMMORTAL PERSONALITY 


The fully accomplished immortal, easy traveler to the stars 
and companion of the perfected in the realm of the Tao, is still 
human. For the time being he or she has still to come back to the 
world of humanity, has to live among ordinary people, to deal with 
life in its various forms. Only after the lifespan decreed at this time 
has ended or when a summons to celestial office arrives, do immor¬ 
tals finally leave this world and ascend off and away for good. They 
then become one of the heavenly host, are given a rank in the 
hierarchy above, and serve in the celestial administration of this 
and the other world. 

As long as they are still with ordinary mortals, however much 
their heads and minds and feelings might rest above the clouds, 
immortals are human beings with particular characteristics; they 
are people with the mind of immortals, with powers and behavior 
patterns unlike the ordinary. 

Definitions and descriptions of this immortal personality differ. 
Most commonly, living immortals are described as perfected. They 
are realized ones in that they have fulfilled their full potential, true 
persons in that they have become truly human. Such people are 
qualified by their unshakable equanimity in all situations. The 
perfected among us do not hasten after gain, do not take pride in 
their achievements, do not worry about their ventures, and do not 
despair in failure. 

They are calm and uninvolved, yet take action in just the way 
that is best for any given situation. With their hands on the pulse 
of nature, they are compassionate and understanding, compliant 
and gentle, helpful and upright. They seem to do the most out¬ 
standing feats with ease and no particular effort, fully in control of 
themselves, yet charming in their compliance with others. 


279 



280 


Immortal Personality 


Their personalities are completely unified. Forgetful of them¬ 
selves, they have no trace of ego, of selfish interests left in them. 
Their minds at-one with the Tao, living immortals are in tune with 
nature and true companions of the world. 

If one or the other of these wonder people takes up an active 
social role, he or she will become a center of society, a sage. Ideally 
the ruler or at least a close adviser to the ruler, such a sage does 
not need to do much actively to make the world a better place. In 
fact, the more he remains in non-action, the more the Tao that is 
concentrated in him can freely radiate and thereby create harmony 
and openness for all. 

Without any effort, sages become models and foundations of 
the world as we know it. At one with the natural radiance of heaven, 
they spread sweetness and light wherever they go. Despite their 
elevated social position, they continue to behave with humility and 
in a withdrawing manner. Sages are whole persons whose govern¬ 
ment is beneficial to all. Their personality is one of complete open¬ 
ness, a free passageway for the cosmic energy of the Tao to flow 
from the root of creation to the benefit of all. 

One with the Tao, living immortals also have various super¬ 
natural powers. The Tao itself is beyond life and death, time and 
space, light and darkness, and so are its perfected. 

Many of their powers are similar to the abilities of shamans. 
Taoist immortals heal the sick, exorcise demons or beasts, make 
rain or stop it, foretell the future, prevent disasters, call upon wild 
animals as helpers, and remain unharmed by water and fire, heat 
and cold. Control over the body, a subtle harmony with the forces of 
nature, as well as an easy relationship with gods and spirits, ghosts 
and demons are equally characteristic of successful shamans as of 
the immortals of the Tao. 

In addition, however, living immortals may also engage in more 
magical activities, feats that characterize them as wizards. They 
are shape-changers who can appear in any form they please. They 
can multiply themselves into many different people and be present 
in more than one place at the same time. They can become visible 
and invisible at will and travel thousands of miles in an instant. 
Controlling not only themselves, they also have power over nature. 
They can make rivers flow backward and mountains tumble. Plants, 
animals, and people die at their command and come back to life if 
they tell them to. They transport buildings to far-off places, open 
up mountains and reveal grottoes. In all these arts, immortals use 
their powers less for the benefit of humankind than for their own 
pleasure, as a demonstration of their might. 



37. The Perfected 


281 


Sometimes they also use these powers to make fun of people or 
to extricate themselves from a difficult situation. In that case, the 
living immortal comes close to the figure of the trickster, someone 
who does not take life and death quite seriously and plays around 
with the world as he pleases. 

Linked to this feature of the immortal personality is the type 
of the happy-go-lucky fellow who hangs out drinking and playing 
games, chess for a preference, writes silly verses on the walls of 
taverns, and shocks contemporary citizens with his unconventional 
behavior. So far beyond that they seem completely out of their 
normal minds, such immortals appear as weirdos and eccentrics. 
They sing at funerals, pinch wine and meat from the gods at sacri¬ 
fices, drink and make merry whenever they get the chance, and 
laugh at anything and everything. 

Accepting life and death as a single flow, they take neither 
seriously and make the best of all they meet. Their happy attitude, 
their playful way of being is characteristic of the popular image of 
the immortal today. It is frequently expressed in pictures of the 
Eight Immortals, shown playing and drinking together in merry 
company, that are often found on good-luck cards and in restau¬ 
rants. Immortals that appear in modern films also tend to be of 
this type. 

The selections below illustrate these character traits of the 
immortals. There is first the description of the perfected of old from 
the Zhuangzi, followed by sections on the sage from the Daode jing. 
Third, their magical powers are presented in several immortals’ 
biographies from the fourth-century Shenxian zhuan (Biographies 
of Spirit Immortals) and Soushen ji (Record of Spirit Inquiries). 
Fourth, finally, some anecdotes about and a poem by Liu Ling, 
eccentric drinker of the third century, reveal the behavior of unin¬ 
hibited personalities and society’s reaction to it. 


37. The Perfected 

The Zhuangzi gives a convincing psychological description of 
the workings of the immortal mind. The perfected or realized one, 
free from worries and the ordinary emotions of life, in this under¬ 
standing is not unlike the mystic described in the various religious 
traditions of the world. 

Mystics all over are said to place their faith in something higher 
than themselves, to go along with life and never be afraid of death. 
Utterly equanimous in all situations, they have freedom and peace 



282 


Immortal Personality 


within, trust in the deity and compassion for all creatures without. 
Their state of mind can in fact be described in the terms of contem¬ 
porary psychology as a state of complete being, of wholeness rather 
than deficiency. 

Never striving for anything, never regretting anything, the 
mystic encompasses a personality fully human, fully at-one. Larger 
than life, he is yet the complete realization of life; one with the 
deity, with the Tao, he is yet more human than before. 

The mystical ideal of the Zhuangzi provides a standard for the 
aims of the religious Taoist. The oneness of mind and Tao, the peace 
and serenity of the Tao within are forever a shining goal along the 
path, a sign of realization and immortality—at least in the spirit. 

For more on the Zhuangzi, see Section 4 above (“Ineffable 
Knowledge”). 


“The Perfected of Old” and “The Great Man,” from Zhuangzi, 
chaps. 6, U, 24. 

What, then, is a perfected? 

The perfected of old did not fight it if he had little, did not grow 
proud if he had much. He never planned his affairs. Someone like 
this would make a mistake and not feel bad about it; he would 
attain success and not claim credit for it. Someone like this would 
climb into high places and not get nervous. He would enter water 
and not get wet; he would enter fire and not get burned. All this is 
because his knowledge could reach to the Tao itself. 

The perfected of old slept without dreaming and woke without 
worrying. He ate without delighting in the taste and breathed very 
deep. In fact, a perfected breathes all the way to his heels, while 
ordinary people breathe only as far as their throats. Bent and 
burdened, they gasp out words as if they were retching. Involved 
deeply with passions and desires, their connection with heaven is 
shallow indeed. 

The perfected of old did not know how to delight in life, nor did 
he know how to loathe death. He came to be without pleasure and 
went back to nonbeing without refusal. He came in an instant, he 
went in an instant, and that was all. He never forgot where he 
began; he never pursued where he would end. He received life and 
enjoyed it. But then he forgot about it and returned it when the 
time came. This is what we mean by not using the mind to repel 
the Tao, nor using humanity to assist heaven. Such indeed is the 
perfected. 



37. The Perfected 


283 


In someone like this, the mind is concentrated, the expression 
serene, the forehead broad. His coolness is like autumn, his warmth 
like spring; thus his joy and anger go along perfectly with the four 
seasons. He perfectly matches the needs of all living beings—no 
one knows his limits. Therefore, when a true sage engages in war¬ 
fare, he may destroy a country, but he will not lose the hearts of 
the people. His advance benefits ten thousand generations, but he 
has no egoistic love for any particular person. . . . 

The perfected of old bore himself with dignity and did not 
budge. He appeared to lack, yet he would receive nothing. He was 
upright in his correctness but never insistent. He was strong in his 
position yet never showed off. 

Mild and cheerful—he seemed joyous. 

Reluctant—he would not help himself 

Annoyed—he let it show in his face. 

Giving—he found rest in his virtue. 

Tolerant—he seemed like the common world. 

Imposing—he would never be controlled. 

Withdrawn—he seemed to prefer his solitude. 

Bemused—he forgot what he was going to say. 

For him penalties were the body of life, rites its outer wings; 
for him wisdom was to be in accordance with the times, and virtue 
to follow the natural course. 

Because for him penalties were the body of life, he was compas¬ 
sionate in killing. Because for him rites were the outer wings of life, 
he always went along with the world. Because for him wisdom was 
to be in accordance with the times, there were things he would not 
help himself but do. Because for him virtue was to follow the natural 
course, his words had head and tail and always made their point. 

And yet—people truly thought that he made strong efforts to 
be like this! 

Therefore, in the perfected of old, all liking was unified into 
one and all disliking was unified into one. His being at-one was 
unified and his not being at-one was unified. When he was at-one, 
he acted as the companion of heaven. When he was not at-one, he 
acted as the companion of humanity. Heaven and humanity not 
fighting each other within—this is the perfected! 

Life and death are fate—regular as the succession of night and 
day. They are a matter of heaven! Nothing that human beings 
could do anything about. A matter of beings’ inner nature! 



284 


Immortal Personality 


Someone may take heaven as his father and love it with all his 
being—how much more should he do for the highest of all? Some¬ 
one may take the ruler as his superior and be ready to die for him 
with all his being—how much more should he do for the truth of 
all? 

When a spring dries up, the fish lie together on the ground. 
They spray each other with moisture and wet each other with 
spittle. Still, how much better were it if they could forget each 
other in the rivers and lakes! In the same way, people praise the 
benevolent ruler Yao and condemn the tyrant Jie. But how much 
better were it if they could forget either and transform themselves 
naturally with the Tao! (chap. 6) 

Now, he who has the earth possesses a great being indeed. As 
he possesses a great being, he cannot be considered a mere being 
himself He is a living being, yet he is not a mere being. Thus he 
can treat beings truly as beings in their own right. It is clear 
indeed! One who treats beings truly as beings in their own right is 
not a mere being himself! How could he merely rule the hundred 
clans in all under heaven and nothing else? 

Rather, he freely leaves and enters the Six Harmonies of the 
universe and wanders through the Nine Continents at his leisure. 
He goes alone and comes alone—he can be called a lone possessor. 
One who possesses alone—he has reached perfect eminence. 

The teaching of the great man is like a shadow following a 
shape, an echo following a sound. When questioned he answers, and 
exhausting all he has, he truly becomes the companion of the world. 

Yet at the same time he dwells in the echoless and moves in 
the shapeless. Throwing off the rush and bustle of the world, he 
floats around the beginningless, passes in and out of the boundless. 
Like the sun, he has no beginning nor end. His face and body are 
joined with Great Unity. In face, he is Great Unity! 

Such a one has no self Selfless, how could he regard having 
something as possession? No, it was the gentleman of antiquity 
who had his eyes on possession. One who has his eyes on nonbeing— 
he is the true friend of heaven and earth, (chap. 11) 

The sage embraces heaven and earth. His benefit reaches to all 
under heaven. Yet no one knows who he is or what family he 
belongs to. For this reason, in life he holds no rank, in death he has 
no posthumous titles. Events do not assemble around him, names 
do not get attached to him—such is the great man.. . . 



38. To Be a Sage 


285 


He who understands this greatness does not seek, does not 
lose, does not reject, does not change himself for the sake of beings. 
He returns to himself and is never exhausted; he follows the ways 
of old and never perishes. Such is the sincerity of the great man! 
(chap. 24) 


38. To Be a Sage 

The ideal human being in the Daode jing is understood more 
politically. The sage here is not only socially responsible but a key 
figure to the integrated functioning and wholeness of government 
and society. It is through him that the Tao can spread throughout 
the world, that the spontaneous flow of natural goodness can work 
for the benefit of all. 

In the Zhuangzi, there is a distinction between the sage 
(shengren) and the lord (junzi), the former being unobtrusive and 
withdrawing, a little bird which no one notices and who works his 
good in solitude. The latter, on the other hand, is a proud man, 
politically ambitious, rich and noble, full of troubles and the wor¬ 
ries of the world. 

The Daode jing has the two coincide in its vision of the sage, a 
vision which becomes dominant in the later tradition. The ideal 
Taoist ruler is a sage-lord who will bring integrity to his subjects, 
harmony to their families, prosperity to their land, and Great Peace 
to all under heaven. Utterly open to the flow of the Tao, this ruler 
spreads its power for the sake of all. 

For more on the Daode jing, see Section 1 above (“The Tao 
That Can’t Be Told”). 


Daode jing (Scripture of the Tao and the Virtue) 

The sage rests in affairs in non-action. 

And practices the teaching of no words. 

The myriad beings are active through him— 

He does not turn away from them. 

They live through him— 

He does not take possession of them. 

The sage acts in the world. 

But does not depend on it; 

His task accomplished. 



286 


Immortal Personality 


He does not stay with it. 

And because he does not stay, 

It remains, (chap. 2) 

Do not exalt the worthy! 

And the people will not compete. 

Do not value rare goods! 

And the people will not steal. 

Do not display desirable things! 

And the people’s hearts will remain at peace. 

Such is the government of the sage: 

He frees their hearts 
And fills their stomachs. 

He weakens their ambitions 
And strengthens their marrow. 

He always causes the people to be unknowing, 

Free from desires. 

So that the smart ones will not dare to impose. 

He acts in non-action. 

And there is nothing that is not well done! (chap. 3) 

Leave off learning! Be without worry! 

Leave off sageliness! Get rid of wisdom! 

The people will benefit a hundredfold. 

Leave off benevolence! Get rid of righteousness! 

The people will recover true obedience and caring love. 
Leave off skill! Get rid of profit! 

There will be no more thieves and robbers. 

Still, these are outer attitudes and not yet sufficient. 
Therefore, let the people always follow these rules: 

Manifest plainness! 

Embrace simplicity! 

Reduce selfishness! 

Have few desires! (chap. 19) 

Yield and you will be whole! 

Bend and you will be straight! 



38. To Be a Sage 


287 


Let go and you will be rich! 

Grow old and you will be new! 

Have little and you will be gaining! 

Have plenty and you will be confused! 

Therefore the sage embraces the One 
And becomes the model for all under heaven. 

Not presenting himself, he is radiant. 

Not thinking himself right, he is famous. 

Not pushing himself forward, he is meritorious. 

Not pitying himself, he is eminent. 

He never competes— 

None under heaven can compete with him! 

The ancients said: 

‘Tield and you will be whole!” 

Are these mere empty words? 

They are not! 

The sage is whole. He follows this. (chap. 22) 

Good traveling leaves not track nor trace. 

Good speaking has not flaw nor bent. 

Good reckoning uses not counters nor devices. 

A door well shut needs no bolts, and yet cannot be opened. 
A knot well tied needs no extra rope, yet cannot be undone. 

Therefore the sage 

Is always there to help the people— 

He rejects no person. 

Is always there to help all beings— 

He rejects no creature. 

Thus it is said: 

He is at-one with universal light. 

For him, good people are the teachers of the bad; 

The bad their work material. 

He neither values the teachers 
Nor passionately loves the material. 



288 


Immortal Personality 


Knowing that, however wise, a person may be greatly 
deluded. 

Such is his essential mystery, (chap. 27) 

Know the male and keep to the female; 

Be the depth of the world. 

As the depth of the world. 

Universal virtue will never leave. 

And you return to be a small child! 

Know the bright and keep to the dark; 

Be the model for the world. 

As the model for the world. 

Universal virtue will never err. 

And you return to be without limit! 

Know glory and keep to humility. 

Be the ground of the world. 

As the ground of the world. 

Universal virtue will suffuse you 
And you return to be perfectly simple! 

In most people. 

Simplicity is lost and things take over. 

But when the sage uses it. 

He becomes a leader among officials. 

Therefore his rule is great— 

It never cuts the network of the world, (chap. 28) 

The sage has no ordinary mind; 

He makes the people’s mind his own. 

The good, I treat with goodness; 

The bad, I treat with equal goodness. 

Thus my virtue is full of goodness. 

The honest, I treat with honesty; 

The dishonest, I treat with equal honesty. 

Thus my virtue is full of honesty. 

The sage in the world 
Unites with the entire world 



38. To Be a Sage 


289 


And makes it his mind, 

Joins the hundred clans 

And makes them his eyes and ears. 

They are all his children, (chap. 49) 

The still is easy to grasp. 

The open is easy to plan. 

The brittle is easy to crack. 

The tiny is easy to lose. 

Act before there’s need! 

Order before there’s chaos! 

A huge thick tree grows from a tiny shoot. 

A nine-storied tower rises from a heap of earth. 

A thousand-mile journey starts with the first step. 

Act with intention and you will fail! 

Grasp hold firmly and you will lose! 

Therefore 

The sage rests in non-action and never fails, 

Is without grasping and never loses. 

People handle affairs and fail close to success. 

Take care of the end as much as of the beginning! 
There will be no failure! 

Therefore 

The sage wishes to be free from desires 
And does not value rare goods. 

He learns to be free from learning 

And recovers what the multitude has passed. 

He aids the spontaneous development of the myriad 
beings— 

Never dares to act. (chap. 64) 

True words are not beautiful; 

Beautiful words are not true. 

A good man does not argue; 

Who argues is not a good man. 

A wise man has no knowledge; 

Who knows is not a wise man. 



290 


Immortal Personality 


The sage does not accumulate: 

The more he does for others, 

The more he gains himself. 

The more he gives to others, 

The more he has himself 

The way of heaven: 

Always benefit, never harm! 

The way of the sage: 

Always work, never compete! (chap. 81) 

39. Magical Powers 

Magical supernatural powers, be they of shamans or of wiz¬ 
ards, appear most clearly in the biographies of the immortals. There 
are many such collections in Chinese literature, stereotyped rather 
early and repetitive in their standard patterns. 

The Shenxian zhuan (Biographies of Spirit Immortals) is the 
second early collection of such biographies after the Han-dynasty 
Liexian zhuan. Originally written by Ge Hong (263-343) in the 
fourth century, it was lost later and reassembled in the sixth cen¬ 
tury. Today it is edited in the Daozang jinghua (5.11). 

The Soushen ji (In Search of the Supernatural) is a collection 
of tales of the marvelous from approximately the same time. It was 
put together by Gan Bao (ca. 320 c.e.) and is today available in an 
edition from Shijie shuju (Taipei, 1970). The story is taken from the 
first chapter. 

The Shenxian zhuan has been translated in its entirety by 
Giintsch 1988. Various individual items are also contained in Giles 
1948. For studies of the Soushen ji, see Bodde 1942, DeWoskin 
1977. 

More details on the arts and powers of the immortals are found 
in Robinet 1979a and 1986, DeWoskin 1990. For a discussion of the 
symbolism of the microcosm, the habitat, and attributes of the 
immortals, see Stein 1990. 


Shenxian zhuan (Biographies of Spirit Immortals) 

The Master With the Yellow Pupils 

The Master with the Yellow Pupils had the family name Ge 
and the personal name Yue. He was good at curing and healing. 
Even at a distance of one thousand miles, if he only knew the name 



39. Magical Powers 


291 


of the sick person, he could cure him. All would get well, even if he 
never saw the patient’s body. 

He was also very good at exorcising with the help of cosmic 
energy. He would get rid of tigers, wolves, and all kinds of nasty 
insects. None of them would dare move when he was around, nor 
would birds dare to fly off. 

He could make the river flow backwards as far as one mile. He 
easily reached the age of 280 years, at which he was still able to lift 
a ton without any trouble. 

He walked as fast as other people rode on horseback. Around 
his head there frequently was a five-colored halo, which made him 
look about ten feet tall. 

At times of drought he could enter deep into the springs and 
summon forth dragons. Controlling them, he ordered them to as¬ 
cend to the sky and produce rain. Numerous times he worked 
miracles like that. 

One day he said farewell to his family and friends, strode on a 
dragon, and left. He never came back. (10.40b) 

The Lady of Great Mystery 

The Lady of Great Mystery had the family name Zhuan and 
was personally called He. When she was a little girl she lost first 
her father and after a little while also her mother. 

Understanding that living beings often did not fulfill their des¬ 
tined lifespans, she felt sympathy and sadness. She used to say: 
“Once people have lost their existence in this world, they cannot 
recover it. Whatever has died cannot come back to life. Life is so 
limited! It is over so fast! Without cultivating the Tao, how can one 
extend one’s life?” 

She duly left to find enlightened teachers, wishing to purify 
her mind and pursue the Tao. She obtained the arts of the Jade 
Master and practiced them diligently for several years. 

As a result she was able to enter the water and not get wet. 
Even in the severest cold of winter she would walk over frozen 
rivers wearing only a single garment. All the time her expression 
would not change, and her body would remain comfortably warm 
for a succession of days. 

The Lady of Great Mystery could also move government of¬ 
fices, temples, cities, and lodges. They would appear in other places 
quite without moving from their original location. Whatever she 
pointed at would vanish into thin air. Doors, windows, boxes, or 



292 


Immortal Personality 


caskets that were securely locked needed only a short flexing of her 
finger to break wide open. Mountains would tumble, trees would 
fall at the pointing of her hand. Another short gesture would resur¬ 
rect them to their former state. 

One day she went into the mountains with her disciples. At 
sunset she took a staff and struck a stone. The stone at once opened 
wide, leading into a grotto-world fully equipped with beds and 
benches, screens and curtains. It also had a kitchen and larder, full 
with wine and food. All was just like it would be in the world of 
everyday life. 

The Lady of Great Mystery could travel ten thousand miles, 
yet at the same time continue to stay nearby. She could transform 
small things to be suddenly big, and big things to be small. She 
could spit fire so big it would rise up wildly into heaven, and yet in 
one breath she could extinguish it again. 

She was also able to sit in the middle of a blazing fire, while 
her clothes would never be even touched by the flames. She could 
change her appearance at will; one moment she was an old man, 
the next a small child. She could also conjure up a cart and horse to 
ride back and forth in if she did not want to walk. 

The Lady of Great Mystery perfectly mastered all thirty-six 
arts of the immortals. She could resurrect the dead and bring them 
back to life. She saved innumerable people, but nobody knew what 
she used for her dresses or her food, nor did anybody ever learn her 
arts from her. Her complexion was always that of a young girl; her 
hair stayed always black as a raven. Later she ascended into heaven 
in broad daylight. She was never seen again. (7.27a) 

Liu An and the Eight Worthies 

Liu An, the Prince of Huainan, used humble words and high 
rewards to invite many guests to his house. He was especially fond 
of scholars of the Tao and masters of magic, and he got them to 
come, be they even a thousand miles away. 

One day, eight old men with white beards and eyebrows ap¬ 
peared at his gate. When the gatekeeper saw them, he immediately 
stole away to inform the prince, who ordered him, as if on his own 
initiative, to put some difficult questions to the newcomers. 

“Uppermost in my lord’s mind,” he said accordingly, “is the 
wish to pursue the Tao of extending one’s years, living a long life, 
and never growing old. Next, he wishes to find great scholars who 
understand things broadly, analyze their deep meaning, and delve 



Fig. 29. Liu An Ascends to Heaven with His Dog and Rooster. Source: 
Zengxiang liexian zhuan. 







294 


Immortal Personality 


into the wonders of the world. Third, he wishes to attract strong 
men full of courage, who can lift heavy tripods and wrestle tigers 
with bare arms. 

“Now you, sirs, are already advanced in years. It looks as though 
you do not have the magic means of warding off decay. Nor do you 
seem to have any extraordinary courage. How, therefore, could you 
penetrate the mysteries of the Three Sovereigns and Five Emper¬ 
ors of antiquity, understand the Eight Simplicities of the Trigrams 
and the Nine Continents of the World? How would you be able to 
investigate profundities, exercise control over things at a distance, 
thoroughly assimilate universal principles, and perfect your inner 
nature? As you are wanting in those requirements, I dare not an¬ 
nounce you to my lord.” 

The Eight Worthies smiled. “We have heard,” one of them said 
in response, “that the prince greatly venerates wise men and never 
tires to leave his meals and jump out of his bath to rush to their 
service. Even to those of small skill he is kind and allows everyone 
to come to his house. 

“In antiquity, people valued the study of the nine times nine 
and cultivated such arts as the imitation of birds’ cries and dogs’ 
barks. When they bought a horse on the market, they seriously 
hoped to purchase a magic steed like the racer of King Mu. When 
they served in office, they were honestly concerned to live up to 
Master Guo in caring for the welfare of their state. 

“Now, we are old and common, and do not have the qualities 
the prince is looking for. We just came here from afar because we 
would like to meet His Highness. It may not be much use, but 
then—it may not do any harm, either. Why, then, should you bar 
these old men from access to your lord? 

“Of course,” he added with a shrug, “if the prince saw that we 
were young, he would assume that we possessed the Tao. Since we 
have white hair, he automatically takes us for foolish old men! I’m 
afraid he is rather shortsighted: neither drills into stone in order to 
find jade nor dives into depths in order to find pearls. 

“So, then, if he dislikes us old—well, then we shall become 
young!” 

Scarcely had he spoken these words, when all eight of them 
turned into youths of fourteen or fifteen. Their coils of hair became 
black and silky; their complexions looked rosy like peach blossoms. 

The gatekeeper, much amazed, went and told the Prince. Hear¬ 
ing the news, he never even put on his shoes but rushed out to 
welcome them. He conducted them up to the Terrace of Contem- 



39. Magical Powers 


295 


plating Immortality, where he drew brocade hangings and arranged 
ivory benches. He lit the incense of a hundred harmonies and placed 
before them tables of gold and jade. 

The Prince paid them deference as if he were their disciple. 
Facing north, he knocked his head and said; “I am a man of medio¬ 
cre ability. Ever since I was a child I have loved the Tao and its 
virtue. Fettered by the duties of the world and drowning in mun¬ 
dane affairs, I cannot escape from my worries and go off, shoulder¬ 
ing my satchel, to live in the mountains and forests. 

“Yet,” he went on with a sigh, “morning and evening I hunger 
and thirst, yearning deeply for the radiance of the spirit. I long to 
wash away the dirt and mud of this world. Alas, that the sincerity 
within myself is so shallow! That the determination in my bosom is 
not stronger! But the arts of the Tao have been so far beyond me as 
if they were the Milky Way itself! 

“Now, however, I have come into unexpected good fortune: You, 
my Lords of the Tao, have condescended to grace my abode with 
your presence! Oh, that it should be my fate to be elevated like 
this! I am happy yet anxious, excited yet nervous about what I 
should do. 

“Therefore, with all my heart, I beg you. Lords of the Tao, to 
have pity and instruct me. Then, though now merely a crawling 
insect, I shall borrow the wings of a heron and soar up into the sky.” 

The eight youths prom.ptly turned into old men again. They 
told the Prince: “Our knowledge is insignificant. We have only bor¬ 
rowed the learning of our elders. Still, we have come to join you 
after we heard that you are fond of scholars. Now, we still have to 
find out what it is you want to learn. 

“One of us, for example, is able to call up wind and rain with¬ 
out effort, to raise clouds and mists in an instant. He can trace 
lines across the lands and they become rivers, scoop up soil and 
make mountains. 

“Another of us can cause tall mountains to collapse, the sources 
of deep springs to run dry. He can tame tigers and panthers, sum¬ 
mon scaly monsters and dragons to appear, and press demons and 
spirits into his service. 

“The third among us can divide his body and transform his 
appearance, become visible or invisible at will. He can hide away 
whole armies, and turn midday into night. 

“Another of us can ride the clouds and tread on empty air, 
cross the sea and walk on flowing waves. He can go in and out of 
the spaceless and travel a thousand miles in one breath. 



296 


Immortal Personality 


“The fifth among us can enter flames unscathed and plunge 
into water without getting wet. He is invulnerable to swords or 
arrows. He feels no cold in winter frosts, nor sweat in the heat of 
summer. 

“Yet another of us can perform a myriad transformations. Bird, 
beast, grass, tree—as the fancy takes him, he can become each and 
any of the myriad beings. He can move mountains and bring rivers 
to a halt. He can transport palaces and move houses around as he 
pleases. 

“The seventh among us can prevent disasters and save others 
from danger. He can protect people from all thinkable harm. He 
also knows how to extend the years and increase longevity, to live a 
long life and attain eternal vision. 

“The last of us, finally, can boil mud into gold and congeal lead 
into silver. He can fuse the eight minerals into a liquid from which 
pearls fly aloft like steam. He can ride in a cloud chariot drawn by 
a team of dragons and thus float even above the Heaven of Great 
Clarity. 

“Now, you Prince, must decide which of these powers you will 
want to acquire.” 

Liu An reverently served the Eight Worthies from morning to 
night. He had them well provided with meat and wine, and care¬ 
fully examined each of their claims. A thousand changes, ten thou¬ 
sand transformations, all sorts of strange arts—there was none 
that they did not master to perfection! 

Later they bestowed upon him the Cinnabar Scripture in thirty- 
six scrolls, so that he could prepare the elixir of immortality... . 

People living at the time report that, when Liu An and the 
Eight Worthies at last took their departure from this earth, the 
vessel containing the dregs of the elixir was left behind in the 
courtyard. The contents were duly finished by the dogs and poultry 
of the establishment, with the result that they too sailed up to 
heaven. Thus roosters were heard crowing in the sky, and the bark¬ 
ing of dogs resounded among the clouds. (4.14a-15a) 


Soushen ji (In Search of the Supernatural) 

ZUO Cl AND THE GENERAL 

Zuo Ci, also known as Yuanfang, was from Lujiang in Anhui. 
From an early age, he possessed a high insight into the workings 
and marvels of the spirit. 





39. Magical Powers 


297 


Once the general Cao Cao invited him to a banquet. Looking 
round his assembled guests with a smile, Cao said: “I have made 
only poor provision of delicacies for this noble company today. What 
we lack are some perch from the Wusong River.” 

“That’s easy,” Zuo said and called for a bronze bowl filled with 
water. Once he had the bowl, he started to fish in it with a bamboo 
rod. After a little while he pulled out a perch. Cao Cao clapped his 
hands vigorously, and everyone was greatly astonished. 

“One fish,” Cao then said, “won’t go far. It would be nice to 
have two.” 

So Zuo cast his line again and soon drew up another fish. Both 
were over three feet long and tasted deliciously fresh. 

Cao Cao had them cut up before his eyes, then had the dish 
handed to all the guests at his table. 

“Now that we have got our perch,” he said thoughtfully, “it is a 
pity that we have no fresh ginger from Sichuan to go with it.” 

“That too can be procured,” Zuo assured him. 

Suspicious lest he should buy some in the vicinity, Cao Cao 
added a demand. “Some time ago,” he said, “I sent a man to Sichuan 
to buy brocade for me. Please instruct your messenger to tell my 
agent to purchase two extra lengths.” 

Zuo’s messenger departed and, in a twinkling, was back again 
with the fresh ginger. “I saw the general’s agent,” he reported. “I 
met him in a brocade shop and gave him your order.” 

More than a year later, Cao’s agent returned. Sure enough, he 
had bought two extra lengths. On being questioned, he said: “About 
a year ago, on such and such a day, I met this man in a brocade 
shop. He informed me of your new order.” 

On a later occasion, Cao Cao, together with a group of some 
hundred scholars, went on an excursion not far outside the city. 
Zuo provided a single jar of wine and a single piece of dried meat. 
Tilting the jar with his own hands, he poured out wine for all the 
assembled guests. There was not one of them who did not drink 
and eat to repletion. 

Cao Cao thought this very strange and had the matter investi¬ 
gated. On sending round to inspect the wine shops, he found that 
the day before they had all be cleared of their stocks of wine and 
meat. This angered him and he secretly determined to put Zuo to 
death. 

The latter was in the general’s palace. But when they came to 
arrest him, he just walked straight into a wall and vanished with¬ 
out a trace. Then Cao hired a number of men to capture him. One 




Fig. 30. Zuo Ci Greets the Immortals’ Crane. Source: Zengxiang liexian 
zhuan. 






40. The Virtue of Wine 


299 


of these saw him in the marketplace. On the point of seizing him, 
suddenly all the people there were transformed into Zuo’s exact 
likeness. No one could tell which one was he. 

Later on, some of the hired men found Zuo on the slope of 
Southtown Hill. Again they pursued him, and he fled among a flock 
of sheep, turning into an animal himself 

The general realized that Zuo would not be caught this way. So 
he told his men to go among the sheep and make the following 
announcement: “Lord Cao will not put you to death. He only wanted 
to try the power of your magic. Now that you have passed the test, 
please come and talk to us!” 

Suddenly one old ram bent its forelegs, stood upright like a 
human being, and said in a human voice: “What a fluster you are 
in!” 

“There!” Cao’s men cried excitedly. “That ram is the one we 
want!” 

But as they made a dash for him, the entire flock of several 
hundred turned into rams. They all bent their forelegs, stood up¬ 
right like humans, and cried: “What a fluster you are in!” 

Nobody knew which one to capture. 


40. The Virtue of Wine 

A classical example of the carefree drinker and eccentric noble¬ 
man is found in Liu Ling of the third century (-265). One among a 
group of like-minded men, the so-called Seven Sages of the Bamboo 
Grove, he spent his life in leisure, drinking, singing, making poetry 
with his friends, and forgetting about the politically troubled times 
he lived in. 

To a certain extent, he and his friends were helped in this 
effort by a drug called Cold-Food-Powder. Taken in small amounts 
with wine, it would lift up the senses into ecstasy but make the 
body feel extremely hot, so that takers would feel compelled to take 
off all their clothes and immerse themselves in cold water. 

While not himself counted among the immortals, Liu Ling is 
recognized as an example for the happy and carefree behavior of 
people who have gone beyond. Like many in his group, he dreamt 
of an existence as a full perfected, wishing to be like the great man 
who could leave it all behind for the pleasures of heavenly 
rambling. 



300 


Immortal Personality 


The poem that extols the virtues of the great man and his wine 
is taken from Wenxuan (Literary Selections), chapter 47. The two 
biographical incidents are mentioned in the Shishuo xinyu (A New 
Account of Tales of the World). 

For a complete annotated translation of the latter, see Mather 
1976. On the Seven Sages, see Holzman 1956, 1978. For more on 
drugs in medieval Chinese society, see Wagner 1973. The transla¬ 
tion of the poem is taken from Kohn 1992. 

Jiude song (In Praise of the Virtue of Wine) 

There is Master Great Man— 

For him heaven and earth are a single morning, 

A thousand years just a short moment. 

The sun and the moon are mere windows for him. 

The Eight Wilds are his pleasure garden. 

He travels without wheels or tracks. 

Sojourns without house or hearth. 

Heaven is his curtain and earth his seat; 

He indulges in what he pleases. 

Stopping, he grasps his wine-cup. 

Holds fast to his goblet; 

Moving, he carries a casket. 

Holds ajar in his hand. 

His only obligation is toward wine. 

But of that he knows plenty. 

Some noble princely courtier 
And an official in seclusion 
Come to hear my song. 

To deliberate its worth. 

Flapping wildly their sleeves. 

Pulling up their robes. 

Anger in their eyes. 

They loudly gnash their teeth. 

They explain to me 

The rules of ritual and order. 

Raise for me their lances 
To show what’s right and wrong. 



40. The Virtue of Wine 


301 


The Master, however, only 

Holds up his jar 

And goes on with his wine. 

Cherishing his cup 
To the last lees. 

With ruffled whiskers he sits. 

Legs spread indecently apart; 

The yeast becomes his pillow. 

The sediments his mat. 

Utterly free from yearnings and from worries. 
Always happy and full in his contentment— 
Without ever moving he gets drunk. 

Then, with a start he sobers up. 

Listens quietly. 

But does not hear the boom of rolling thunder; 
Watches intently. 

But does not see towering Mount Tai. 

Unaware of the cold biting his flesh. 

Unmoved by the afflictions of common greed. 

Looking down he watches: 

The myriad beings bustle there about 
Like tiny pieces of duckweed 
Floating on the Han and Jiang. 

The two courtiers stand as servants at his sides. 
Like caterpillars near a sphinx. 


“On Liu Ling,” from Shishuo xinyu (A New Account of Tales 
of the World) 

On many occasions Liu Ling, under the influence of wine, would 
be completely free and uninhibited. Sometimes he would take off 
his clothes and sit naked in his room. 

Once some people came to see him and chided him for this 
behavior. Liu Ling retorted, “1 take heaven and earth for my pillars 
and roof, and the rooms of my house for my pants and coat. And 
now, what are you gentlemen doing in my pants?” (23.3) 



302 


Immortal Personality 


Liu Ling was once suffering from a hangover and was ex¬ 
tremely thirsty. He asked his wife for some wine. 

However, she had poured all the wine away and smashed all 
the vessels. “You are drinking far too much!” she pleaded, tears in 
her eyes. “This is no way to preserve your life! Oh, if you would 
only stop!” 

“A very good idea,” Liu Ling agreed. “But I am unable to stop 
all by myself It can only be done if I pray to the ghosts and spirits 
and take an oath to stop drinking from now on. So, please get 
ready the wine and meat for the necessary sacrifice.” 

“As you wish,” his wife said. She duly set out wine and meat 
before the spirits and requested Liu Ling to kneel down and take 
his oath. 

Ling duly knelt and prayed: 

“Heaven brought forth Liu Ling 
And took “wine” for his name. 

At one gulp he downs a gallon— 

Five dipperfuls to ease the hangover. 

As for his wife’s complaint. 

Be careful not to listen!” 

Thereupon he drained the spirits’ wine and ate all the meat. 
Before he knew it, he was drunk again. (23.6) 



Chapter Eleven 


ASCENSION 


The transition from a realized life on earth to an eternal exist¬ 
ence in the glory and delight of the heavens is the process of ascen¬ 
sion. Ascension is the key phase that separates immortals as realized 
human beings from immortals as members of the administration of 
heaven and attendants on the higher deities of the Tao. 

Ascension is moreover a strong symbol of the going-beyond of 
all individuality and social integration of the world. Whether a 
given immortal observes his or her own funeral, whether a high 
Taoist master formally prepares and exhibits his or her “transfor¬ 
mation,” or whether the person just vanishes to the great conster¬ 
nation of all around—in all cases ascension signifies the ultimate 
break with the world of humanity, the transcendence of all that’s 
ordinary, common, normal, in body as well as in mind. 

Ascension comes in different forms. The highest way to ascend 
is by celestial chariot. Receiving a summons to office among the 
heavenly bureaucrats, the immortal readies himself or herself and, 
on the day appointed, is formally met by a dragon-drawn cloudy 
chariot and escorted up to heaven by a large entourage of celestial 
guards, supernatural horsemen, and divine lads. The most famous 
ascension of this kind is that of the Yellow Emperor, who mounted 
on a huge celestial dragon together with seventy of his followers, 
some people trying to cling to the dragon’s beard and claws in a 
desperate effort at eternal life. 

The second most powerful way of ascension is by just vanish¬ 
ing completely. Again, a divine invitation is received, but rather 
than in a formal reception, the immortal ascends upward on his 
own, using clouds and streams of air to support himself. Here, too, 
the celestial-to-be announces his or her supernatural state and gets 
ready for departure, but the entire setting is decidedly less formal. 
This form of ascension, not as celebrated and rather less well pre- 


303 



304 


Ascension 


pared, often leaves friends and family in a state of confusion. How 
can one be sure there wasn’t foul play by some nasty demon? 

A third way of ascension is by “deliverance from the corpse.” 
This is a rather crude way to leave, since it requires that the 
immortal leave some physical token of his or her worldly presence 
behind. This shows that he or she is quite able to dissolve com¬ 
pletely into the heavenly spheres. Typically, in such cases there is a 
corpse—unless substituted by a bamboo staff or sword—but unlike 
that of an ordinary dead person, this body does not decay. Far from 
smelling offensive in any way, the corpse is fragrant; pink clouds 
come to hover around it, and strands of celestial music are heard. 
Most classically, this is the way Taoist masters go, announcing 
their “transformation” and leaving the world sitting erect in deep 
meditation. 

In terms of methods, there are several ways to undertake an 
ascension. The most effective and immediate is by swallowing a 
cinnabar elixir, a concoction of various metals and minerals, but 
ultimately identifiable as a mercury compound. The stronger the 
elixir, the more instantaneous is the transformation. Operative al¬ 
chemy in traditional China is not only a formalized and ritualized 
process of replicating the creation of the universe and an attempt 
to find the philosophers’ stone, but the safest way to be ready for 
the celestial summons at the moment it comes. Elixirs are highly 
poisonous, but ascending immortals knew where they were going. 

Another way is to produce an inner elixir by way of internal 
alchemy. Here an immortal embryo is created, an agent that com¬ 
bines all the celestial elements of the practitioner and that will 
travel freely through the otherworldly realms. When the summons 
comes or the natural lifespan of this body ends, the embryo ascends 
once more, this time for good. 

Then again, there is the way of dissolution, a more meditative 
method in which the adept transforms his or her self and body to 
ever subtler energies and eventually loses self completely in the 
overall stream of the Tao. Rather a gradual process, ascension here 
is the opening of the earth-bound body and mind to a more subtle 
being, the gradual floating away of the self and merging into the 
nothingness of the Tao. 

The selections below show these various types and ways of 
ascension. There is first the description of the nine elixirs from the 
fourth-century Baopuzi (Book of the Master Who Embraces Sim¬ 
plicity), a highly technical exposition of the methods and aims of 
operative alchemy. 



41. Alchemical Transformation 


305 


Next, there is Zhang Boduan’s Wuzhen pian (Awakening to 
Perfection), one of the classics of inner alchemy, dated to the elev¬ 
enth century. Third, Sun Simiao’s Cunshen lianqi ming (Visualiza¬ 
tion of Spirit and Refinement of Energy) is a short but clear 
description of the immortal process of self-transformation and the 
gradual stages of dissolution into the Tao. It is dated to the seventh 
century. 

Fourth, there are three reports on actual ascensions. One, from 
the Shenxian zhuan (Biographies of Spirit Immortals) of the fourth 
century, records the adventures of one who ascended in a cloudy 
chariot and come back to tell about it. The second, the Huang 
xianshi Qutong ji (Record of Immortal Master Huang and Lad Qu), 
is a late Tang record on the strange events surrounding the sudden 
disappearance of Lad Qu, a young Taoist adept. The third is a short 
description of the typical transformation of a Taoist master (in this 
case a mistress), an excerpt from the tenth-century biography of 
the Flower Maiden from Du Guangting’s Yongcheng jixian lu (Record 
of the Assembled Immortals of the Heavenly Walled City). 


41. Alchemical Transformation 

Alchemy, the concoction of a cinnabar or elixir, is the prime 
method to prepare for ascension. Cinnabar, a reddish mineral dust 
found along riverbanks, transmutes into mercury when heated. If 
combined with silver, it turns into a highly poisonous mixture that 
will deliver anyone instantaneously into the otherworld. 

The taking of such an elixir, upon receiving the celestial sum¬ 
mons, is in fact a form of ritual suicide. However strong the belief 
in a continued existence in the upper reaches of the universe, how¬ 
ever desirable the transformation, there is no belying the physical 
death that Taoists have to undergo at the time of ascension. Only, 
of course, death at this point is no longer death, suicide no longer 
suicide. The physical transformation is a form of liberation and the 
ultimate fulfillment of a longstanding effort. 

There is a logic behind mercury poisoning and the replenishing 
of the body with metals and minerals. Since these substances are 
themselves non-decaying, they are believed to prevent from decay 
whatever they come in contact with, more so when actually ingested. 
There is no doubt that Taoists with their diet of grain-avoidance had 
to rely a great deal on vegetal and mineral substances to maintain 
health and strength. Nor is it questionable that, taken in small 



306 


Ascension 


amounts, the various substances they used are quite helpful and 
form an important part of medicine in China and elsewhere. 

The compound drugs produced on the basis of cinnabar are 
thus a direct continuation of the crude and more innocuous drugs 
used for medical purposes and in supplementing Taoist diet. Al¬ 
chemy, in its pharmacological dimension, is thus linked immedi¬ 
ately to Chinese medicine and traditional dietetics. At the same 
time, alchemy is a highly ritualized undertaking that has a prima¬ 
rily religious goal. The concoction of cinnabar elixirs thus inte¬ 
grates the various strands of the Taoist tradition as much as it is a 
pinnacle of the Taoist career. 

The description of the various recipes below is taken from the 
chapter “Gold and Cinnabar” iJindan) of the Baopuzi neipian (Book 
of the Master Who Embraces Simplicity, Inner Chapters: 4.2a- 
11b). This text, compiled by Ge Hong (263-343) in the early fourth 
century, is contained in DZ 1185, fasc. 868-70. 

The inner chapters of the Baopuzi are translated in Ware 1966. 
The outer chapters are rendered in Sailey 1978. For a study of the 
Scripture of the Nine Tripods’ Cinnabar and other early texts, see 
Pregadio 1991. 

For a short survey of the development of Chinese alchemy, see 
Akahori 1989. A detailed historical survey is found in Needham et 
al. 1976. For more on alchemical methods, apparatus, and theoreti¬ 
cal system, see Needham et al. 1980. A translation and analysis of 
a Tang-dynasty alchemical tract is found in Sivin 1968. For a study 
of alchemy in Highest Clarity Taoism, see Strickmann 1979. 


“Gold and Cinnabar” (Jindan), from Baopuzi neipian (Book 
of the Master Who Embraces Simplicity, Inner Chapters) 

[2a] Once in the past, Zuo Ci was meditating in the Heavenly 
Pillar Mountains, when a spirit being revealed several immortal 
scriptures on gold and cinnabar to him. At the time, however, the 
political chaos at the end of the Han dynasty prevented him from 
concocting the elixir. Instead he fled his mountain retreat, crossed 
the Yangtse and went east with the intention to select a famous 
mountain and cultivate the Tao he had received. 

At this place my father’s cousin, Ge Xuan, now known as an 
immortal himself, received the texts from Zuo Ci. In all, he re¬ 
ceived the Scripture of the Great Clarity Cinnabar in three scrolls, 
the Scripture of the Nine Tripods’ Cinnabar in one scroll, and the 
Scripture of the Golden Fluid Cinnabar, also in one scroll. 



41. Alchemical Transformation 


307 


In the following my teacher, Zheng Yin, was my uncle’s dis¬ 
ciple. He received these texts from my uncle, but since he was from 
a poor family, he lacked the means to purchase the ingredients. I in 
turn was his pupil, sprinkling and sweeping his courtyard for a 
long time. [2b] Eventually, on Mount Horsetrack [Maji], we set up a 
sacred area and swore to a covenant. Thus I received the scrolls 
from him together with secret oral instructions, which may never 
be written down. 

Previously these writings had not existed in this area. They all 
came from Zuo Ci, who transmitted them to my uncle. He in turn 
passed them on to Zheng Yin, from whom I received them. There¬ 
fore other followers of the Tao know nothing about them, while I 
have had them for over twenty years. However, my resources have 
not been sufficient to enable me to follow their instructions. For 
this I can feel only deep regret. 

On the other hand, those who have accumulated gold in their 
coffers and gathered mountains of cash do not know that these 
methods for attaining immortality exist. Even if they heard about 
them, not one in ten thousand would believe them. . . . 

[3a] Gold and cinnabar preparations are such that the longer 
they are heated, the more wondrous are their transformations. 
Even after a hundred firings, gold does not melt away, nor does it 
decay, no matter how long it is buried. By taking these two sub¬ 
stances we refine our bodies so that we neither grow old nor die. 
Actually, this seeking of external substances to make ourselves 
more solid is much like a fire that does not die as long as the fuel 
maintains it. It is like feet smeared with verdigris that will not 
decay in water because the strength of the copper serves to protect 
the flesh. On entering the body, however, gold and cinnabar perme¬ 
ate the blood and energy systems. They do not merely provide an 
external help. . . . [3b] 

Say, you only know some idle chatter about wondrous drugs 
but have not been accepted by a teacher and yet you desire to 
ascend to heaven by using some cheap medicine. Would this not be 
the same as spurring a lame donkey in pursuit of a strong wind? 
Like crossing a huge river by poling a reed boat? [4a] There are 
many lesser recipes for edible cinnabar, which vary greatly in effect 
due to the different quality of their preparation. Although there are 
good and bad ones among them, in all cases the number of cyclical 
transformations is insufficient. They are like wine that has been 
fermented once: it can in no way compare to the pure clear wine 
that has been fermented nine times. 



308 


Ascension 


It is a fact, however, that the least of the minor cinnabars is 
far superior to even the best of herbal and plant medicines. When 
roasted, all herbs turn to ashes, but cinnabar, when heated, pro¬ 
duces mercury, which after a number of successive transformations 
reverts to cinnabar. It is thus far better than herbal and plant 
medicines. This is why cinnabar can produce longevity in people. 
The spirit immortals have long perceived this principle. How infi¬ 
nitely different are they from ordinary men! .. . 

[6a] The Scripture of the Yellow Emperor’s Divine Cinnabar of 
the Nine Tripods says: “The Yellow Emperor took this elixir and 
ascended to the immortals.” 

It also states: “Through breathing exercises and gymnastics, 
by taking herbs and plant medicines, you may extend your years, 
but you will not avoid death in the end. [6b] Only taking the divine 
elixir will give you long life without end and allow you to live as 
long as heaven and earth themselves. You will be able to rise on 
clouds and drive dragon chariots, to freely travel up and down and 
reach the heaven of Great Clarity!” 

The Yellow Emperor transmitted this divine process to the Mas¬ 
ter of Mystery [Xuanzi] and warned him: “This is a highly powerful 
Tao! It must be transmitted only to wise people. If a person lacks 
the necessary qualities, even if he offers you jade piled as high as a 
mountain, never divulge it!” 

On the other hand, if you actually receive it, you must first 
throw a golden human statuette and a golden fish into an east¬ 
ward-flowing stream as a pledge. At the same time, you must close 
a formal covenant with your teacher by smearing your lips with 
blood. Make sure that nobody who lacks immortal’s bones even 
observes the process! 

To prepare the cinnabar itself, first find an uninhabited place 
on a sacred mountain! Under no circumstances, take more than 
three companions! 

Then begin by purifying yourself for one hundred days. Wash 
your body and hair in water enriched with the five fragrances and 
make yourself utterly clean! Never approach any defiling or dirty 
object or let ordinary people come anywhere near you! Let no disbe¬ 
lievers know of your plans! If they denounce the divine medicine, 
successful preparation will be impossible. Yet, once it has been 
successfully prepared, you can raise your entire family to become 
immortal, not just your own self! 

[7a] Worldly folk do not prepare divine elixirs but have great 
faith in herbal medicines—although they decay when buried, get 



41. Alchemical Transformation 


309 


mushy when cooked, and burn when roasted. Since these substances 
cannot even keep themselves alive, how could they ever give life to 
human beings? 

There are nine cinnabar elixirs essential for the attainment of 
long life. But they are not something that anyone can or should 
observe or hear about. The masses, in their frantic creeping about, 
know only how to hanker after honors and riches. How, really, 
would they be different from walking corpses? 

Throughout the preparation of the elixir you must continue to 
perform offerings and make sacrifices to the gods and spirits. For 
more details, see the separate chapter below, complete with illus¬ 
trations and instructions. 

The first elixir is known as Cinnabar Florescence. It starts 
with the preparation of tin oxide. From several dozen pounds each 
of realgar solution, kalinite solution, Turkestan salt, lake salt, 
arsenolite, oyster shells, red bole, soapstone, and white lead, pre¬ 
pare Six-One Lute. Then fire the elixir for thirty-six days. Take it 
for seven days and you will be an immortal. 

Also, you can make a pill of this elixir by mixing it with some 
glue. Then place it in a raging fire, and it will soon turn into gold. 
You can also produce gold by mixing 240 half-ounces of the elixir 
with 100 pounds of mercury and firing it. If the gold forms, you 
know the true medicine is done. [7b] If it does not form, reseal the 
medicine and fire it again for another thirty-six days. This never 
fails. 

The second elixir is called Divine Cinnabar or Divine Talis¬ 
man. Take it for one hundred days and you will be an immortal. To 
cross streams or pass through fire, smear the soles of your feet 
with it and you will be able to walk over water. After taking only 
three spoonfuls of it, the three deathbringers and nine worms in 
your body will disappear. All your illnesses will be cured. 

The third elixir is called Divine Cinnabar. Take a spoonful for 
one hundred days and you will be an immortal. It will also confer 
deathlessness if given to livestock. More than that, it also wards off 
all weapons. Take it for one hundred days, and immortals and jade 
maidens as well as the demons and spirits of streams and moun¬ 
tains will come to serve you. 

The fourth elixir is called Reverted Cinnabar. Take a spoonful of 
it for one hundred days and you will be an immortal. Vermilion birds 
and celestial phoenixes will soar and hover above you; jade maidens 
will come to your side. Take one spoonful of this and mix it with one 
pound of mercury. Heat it and it will immediately turn into gold. 
Smear coins and goods with it, and they will return to you the very 



310 


Ascension 


same day they are traded. [8a] Use it to draw a character above 
anyone’s eyes, and the hundred demons will flee in terror. 

The flfth elixir is called Dietetic Cinnabar. Take it for thirty 
days and you will be an immortal. Demons and spirits will come to 
serve you; jade maidens will make their appearance. 

The sixth elixir is called Reflned Cinnabar. Take it for ten days 
and you will be an immortal. When mixed and fired with mercury, 
it too turns into gold. 

The seventh elixir is called Tender Cinnabar. Take one spoon¬ 
ful for one hundred days and you will be an immortal. If taken 
mixed with raspberry juice, it is a strong aphrodisiac that will 
cause even men of ninety to beget children. Mixed with lead and 
fired, it turns into gold. 

The eighth elixir is called Fixed Cinnabar. Take it and you will 
immediately be an immortal. Hold a piece about the size of a jujube 
seed in your hand, and the hundred demons will flee in terror. Use 
it to draw a character over a doorway, and no evil powers will dare 
approach it. Thieves and bandits, tigers and wolves will all be put 
to flight. 

The ninth elixir is called Cold Elixir. Take one spoonful for one 
hundred days and you will be an immortal. [8b] Immortal lads and 
maidens will come to serve you. You will be able to fly without 
feathers or wings. 

Acquire any one of these nine elixirs and you will be an immor¬ 
tal! There is no need to prepare all nine. Which one you prepare 
depends entirely on your preference. After taking any one of them, 
if you wish to ascend to heaven in broad daylight, you can do so. If 
you wish to remain on this earth for some time, you can come and 
go freely wherever you wish, no matter what the barriers. Nothing 
and nobody will harm you. 

There is also the Scripture of the Divine Cinnabar of Great 
Clarity. This method comes from the Primordial Lord. The Primor¬ 
dial Lord was the teacher of Laozi, while the text was part of the 
Great Clarity Scripture of Observing the Heavens. This consisted 
originally of nine scrolls. But the first three of these were never 
transmitted or taught. The second set of three was permanently 
submerged beneath the three springs of heaven, since nobody in 
the world was found worthy to receive them in transmission. The 
last set of three, finally, constitute the Scripture of the Divine Cin¬ 
nabar. It consists of the top, middle, and bottom scrolls. 

The Primal Lord is the chief of the gods and immortals. He 
harmonizes yin and yang, gives orders to demons and spirits, wind 



41. Alchemical Transformation 


311 


and rain. He drives a chariot with nine dragons and twelve white 
tigers. [9a] All the immortals of the world are his subordinates; yet 
he claims to have achieved his rank through studying the Tao and 
taking a cinnabar elixir. If even to him it did not come naturally, 
how much more effort must it take for ordinary mortals! 

The Scripture says: “When a superior person attains this Tao, 
he or she becomes an official in heaven. When a medium person 
attains this Tao, he or she will join the immortals on Mount Kunlun. 
When an inferior person attains this Tao, he or she will live a very 
long life on earth.” 

Indeed, common folk are ignorant and have no faith; they say 
this is all empty talk and, from morning to night, engage solely in 
occupations that will inevitably lead to their death. They do not 
even attempt to pursue long life! How then can even heaven itself 
force such people to live? 

The only things ordinary mortals know are fine food, nice 
clothes, sensual pleasures, riches and honors. Take care not to 
speak of the divine elixir in front of those who give free reign to 
passion and lust and are therefore bound to die in a short while. It 
will make them mock the process of the Tao and ridicule perfection. 
If you transmit the Cinnabar Scripture to an undeserving person, 
you will suffer bad luck yourself. If, however, you find a true be¬ 
liever, you may share the finished medicine. Beware! Don’t pass 
the recipe to anybody without due consideration! 

What use does a person of the Tao have for lords and kings? 
As soon as the elixir is done, not only do you have a very long life, 
but you can even make your own gold. [9b] However, when you 
have achieved this, you must expend one hundred pounds of 
the gold on a great sacrifice to the gods. For specific instructions 
regarding this ceremony, see the particular scroll. The rules here 
are different from those used in the nine tripod elixirs mentioned 
above. 

Allocate the following sums to the deities listed below: 


to Heaven 

20 pounds 

to the Sun and the Moon 

5 pounds 

to the Great Dipper 

8 pounds 

to the God of the Great One 

8 pounds 

to the God of the Well 

5 pounds 

to the God of the Stove 

5 pounds 

to the Lord of the River 

12 pounds 

to Earth 

5 pounds 

to various ghosts and spirits 

20 pounds 



312 


Ascension 


Then place the remaining twelve pounds in a sound leather 
pouch and, on a propitious day at the peak hour of the market in 
the city, drop it silently among the crowd. Leave the place without 
a single glance backward. Any gold you make over and above the 
hundred pounds, use as you please. But if you don’t use the first 
portion of the gold to serve the gods, you will surely incur disaster. 

[10a] The Scripture also says: 

The Tao of long life and immortality 
Does not depend on offerings 
Or service to the spirits; 

Nor does it lie with gymnastics. 

Various bendings and stretchings. 

The essence of ascension to immortality 
Is the divine cinnabar alone! 

Knowing it is not easy! 

Doing it is truly hard! 

Produce it and you can live forever! 

Recently, at the end of the Han dynasty. Master Yin the 
Longlived [Yin Changsheng] concocted the elixir of Great Clarity 
and attained immortality. He began as a student of the Confucian 
classics and was very gifted by nature. He composed poetry and 
also a eulogy and introduction for the Scripture of the Divine Cin¬ 
nabar. In the latter, he gives a clear account of his early studies of 
the Tao under a teacher. He also lists forty-odd acquaintances of 
his who became immortals as well. 

The making of the elixir of Great Clarity is somewhat more 
difficult than that of the Nine Tripod Elixirs described above. How¬ 
ever, it represents a superior method for ascending to heaven in 
broad daylight. Here you may light the fire only after preparing 
fortified vinegar, red crystal salt, calomel, a mixture of lead, gold, 
and mercury, as well as special talismans, and the Three-Five di¬ 
vine solution. 

This elixir, once cycled, brings immortality in three years. 

This elixir, twice cycled, brings immortality in two years. [10b] 

This elixir, thrice cycled, brings immortality in one year. 

This elixir, four times cycled, brings immortality in half a year. 

This elixir, five times cycled, brings immortality in 100 days. 



42. The Inner Elixir 


313 


This elixir, six times cycled, brings immortality in forty days. 

This elixir, seven times cycled, brings immortality in thirty 
days. 

This elixir, eight times cycled, brings immortality in ten days. 

This elixir, nine times cycled, brings immortality in three 
days. 

Place the elixir, which has been cycled nine times, in a reaction 
vessel and expose it to the sun after the summer solstice. When the 
container becomes hot, introduce a pound of cinnabar beneath the 
lid. Even while you are watching, with the full power of the sun 
shining upon it, the whole content will suddenly glow and sparkle 
with all the colors of spirit radiance. It will immediately turn into 
reverted elixir. If you take even a single spoonful, you will straight¬ 
away rise to heaven in broad daylight. But make sure that you seal 
this nine-cycle elixir in an earthenware crucible and heat it by a 
chaff fire, at first gently, then with more intensity. 

The nine cyclical mutations are different according to the vary¬ 
ing speed of their effectiveness. [11a] The fewer transformations 
the elixir has undergone, the weaker the medicine will be. In that 
case you will have to take it for a longer period and immortality 
will come more slowly. The more cycles it undergoes, on the other 
hand, the stronger the medicine will become. Even if you take it 
only for a few days, you will become an immortal instantaneously. 


42. The Inner Elixir 

The Wuzhen pian (Awakening to Perfection) is one of the most 
important Taoist texts since the Song and a fundamental manual 
of inner alchemy. It combines the three teachings of Taoism, Bud¬ 
dhism, and Confucianism, emphasizing the double cultivation of 
both inner nature and fate, of inner spirituality and physical lon¬ 
gevity, without foregoing the moral teachings of Confucius. In this 
sense, the text places its ideas above and beyond those of each of 
the three teachings taken individually. 

The Wuzhen pian was originally written by Zhang Boduan (ca. 
983-1082), a military adviser to a high official of the Song. Its 
preface is dated to 1075, its postface to 1078. In style not unlike 
the Cantong qi (Triple Unity), an alchemical classic based on Yijing 
exegesis and full of hexagram symbolism, the text is rather cryptic 
and difficult to understand. 



314 


Ascension 


The multiplicity of layers and meaning have led to manifold 
interpretations and commentaries ever since the text became popu¬ 
lar in the mid-twelfth century. It is extant in numerous editions 
within and without the Taoist canon. The version used here is 
found in Xiuzhen shishu (Ten Books on the Cultivation of Perfec¬ 
tion) in DZ 263, fasc. 122-31 (27.1a-14b). 

For an early translation of the text, see Davis and Chao 1939. 
A recent English version of the text, including the commentary by 
Liu Yiming of the Qing dynasty, is found in Cleary 1987. An ex¬ 
tended review of this is found in Baldrian-Hussein 1990. 

Wuzhen pian (Awakening to Perfection) 

1 

First take the power of heaven and earth and make them 
into your crucible; 

Then isolate the essences of the sun [raven] and the moon 
[rabbit]. 

Urge the two things to return to the Tao of the center 
[yellow]; 

Then work hard to attain the golden elixir—how would it 
not come forth? 


2 

Secure your furnace, set up your crucible; always follow the 
power of heaven and earth. 

Forge their essence and refine their innermost power, 
always keeping well in control of your yin and yang souls. 

Congealing and dissolving, the incubating temperature 
produces transmutation. 

Never discuss its mystery and wonder in idle conversation! 

3 

Don’t waste your effort in building an oven of muddy 
cinnabar! 

To refine the medicine, just look for the crescent-moon 
furnace within. 

Spontaneously and of itself it has heaven’s way of true 
firing; 

There is no need for purple coal or blowing bellows. 

4 

In the crescent-moon furnace, jade blossoms grow; 

In the vermilion crucible, mercury flows evenly along. 



42. The Inner Elixir 


315 


Only after harmonizing them with great firing power 
Can you plant the central [yellow] sprout to gradually ripen. 

5 

Swallowing saliva and breathing exercises are what many 
people do, 

Yet only with the method of this medicine can you truly 
transform life. 

If there is no true seed in the crucible, 

It is like taking water and fire and boiling an empty pot. 

6 

Harmonize your inner lead and mercury to produce the 
elixir; 

Whether big or small, there is no harm; both areas are quite 
safe. 

If you wonder what the true lead may be— 

It is moonlight shining every day on the western river. 

7 

Before you have refined the reverted elixir, do not enter the 
mountains. 

Since on the mountains, in and out, there is no lead for you. 
Rather, the supreme treasure is in everybody’s home; 

It’s just that folk are ignorant and never recognize it. 

8 

When bamboo breaks, use bamboo to repair it! 

To hatch a chicken, use an egg! 

To match up different species is a waste of effort; 

Much better, add to your spiritual potential with true lead. 

9 

To use lead thus, don’t use ordinary lead; 

Use true perfected lead alone, and throw it out when used. 
This is the deep secret of using lead. 

Use it and then don’t use it—these are veritable words. 

10 

“Empty the mind and fill the belly”—such profundity of 
meaning! 

Just, to empty your mind, you must know it first. 



316 


Ascension 



Fig. 31. Dragon and Tiger Join the Practitioner. Source: Jinyi huandan 
yinzheng tu. 


Similarly, to refine your lead, you must first fill the belly: 

Understand this to protect the mass of gold that fills your 
halls within. 

11 

In a vision, I visited the innermost power of the west and 
ascended to the ninth heaven; 

A perfected gave me a scripture about the origin of things. 

The text was simple and easy, not too many words; 

Just teaching how to refine true mercury and lead. 

12 

[It said that] the Tao, from emptiness and nonbeing, 
brought forth the energy of the One; 





42. The Inner Elixir 


317 


Then, from the energy of the One, it gave birth to yin and 
yang. 

Yin and yang then combined to form the three; 

The three in turn multiplied and produced the myriad 
beings in their prosperity. 


13 

The lightning of true water boils and thunders in the realm 
of metal and of water; 

True fire arises from Mount Kunlun—these are our yin and 
yang. 

The two restored and harmonized in proper ways 

Make the elixir grow naturally, pervade the body with its 
fragrance. 


14 

True fire and water, if returned without the proper timing. 

May contain the four cosmic emblems, yet there will be no 
elixir. 

It is only when these two embrace the true earth and center 

That the elixir can be reverted properly. 

15 

Next, the sun, in the position of true fire, turns into a 
female. 

Water, in the palace of the moon, then becomes a male. 

If you do not know the meaning of inversion here. 

Stop engaging in lofty discussion with your restricted views. 

16 

Take the central solid core in the position of true water. 

Let it drip into the palace of true fire, have it change the yin 
in your abdomen. 

From this transformation develop your own inner power of 
heaven! 

Then you may be hidden in obscurity or fly through the 
cosmos—all as you desire! 


17 

True thunder, dragon and mercury, comes from the realm of 
fire; 

True lake, tiger and lead, is born in the realm of water. 



Fig. 32. The Immortal Embryo Emerges. Source: Jinyi huandan 
yinzheng tu. 

Both processes follow the principle of “the child giving birth 
to the mother”; 

With them, the complete essences of all the five agents are 
joined in the center. 




43. Gradual Dissolution 


319 


18 

The red dragon and black tiger take up their positions in the 
west and east; 

The four cosmic emblems join together in the position of the 
center. 

The processes of “return” and “approach” can now be 
started; 

Who says the golden elixir will not be soon achieved? 

19 

The white tiger in the western mountains begins to go wild; 

The green dragon in the eastern sea is no match for him. 

Both beasts interlock and fight hard to the death. 

They turn into a mass of purple golden frost. 

20 

On the peak of Sacred-Flower Mountain, the male tiger 
roars; 

At the bottom of Sun-Mulberry Ocean, the female dragon 
howls. 

The matchmaker of the center spontaneously knows how to 
join them together; 

They become husband and wife, sharing the same core. 

21 

When the half-moon rises bright over the horizon 

And you can hear the dragon howl, the tiger roar. 

Immediately apply your mind well to cultivate the two for 
eight more cycles. 

Within an hour, you can see the elixir take shape inside. 


43. Gradual Dissolution 

Sun Simiao (ca. 581-682) was an alchemist, Taoist, and physi¬ 
cian of the seventh century. Born near the capital Chang’an, he 
was a sickly child and due to this developed a strong interest in 
healing, diets, alchemical procedures, and Taoist practices. Train¬ 
ing under various masters, he eventually settled on Mount Taibo, 
not far from his original home. 

Received by various emperors. Sun Simiao became well known 
and, after his transformation in 682, was venerated as the divine 



320 


Ascension 


King of Medicines, a hagiography still active today. He is the au¬ 
thor of various famous medical books, notably the Qianjin fang 
(Prescriptions Worth a Thousand Ounces of Gold). 

His Cunshen lianqi ming (Visualization of Spirit and Refine¬ 
ment of Energy) is translated here after the version in Yunji qiqian 
33.12a-14b. Another complete version of the text is contained in 
DZ 834, fasc. 571. 

The main body of the work consists of a description of the five 
phases of the mind and the seven stages of the body. This also 
forms an important section of the Dingguan jing (Scripture on 
Concentration and Observation), found in DZ 400, fasc. 189, in 
Yunji qiqian 17.6 b-13a, as well as in the appendix to the Zuowang 
lun (Discourse on Sitting in Oblivion; 15b-18a). 

For an annotated translation of these various texts, see Kohn 
1987. For more on Sun Simiao, see Sivin 1968, Engelhard! 1989. A 
translation of the Qianjin fang is contained in Despeux 1987. The 
translation here is taken from Kohn 1987. Section headings are the 
translator’s. 


Cunshen lianqi ming (Visualization of Spirit and Refinement 
of Energy) 

Outline 

[12a] The body is the habitation of spirit and energy. As long as 
spirit and energy are there, the body is healthy and strong. As soon 
as spirit and energy scatter, the body dies. Therefore, if you wish to 
preserve yourself whole, first calm spirit and energy. 

Understand: energy is the mother of spirit; spirit is the son of 
energy. Only when energy and spirit are together can you live long 
and not die. 

If you, therefore, wish to calm the spirit, first refine primordial 
energy. When this energy resides in the body, spirit is calm and 
energy is like an ocean. With the ocean of energy full to overflow¬ 
ing, the mind is calm and the spirit stable. When this stability is 
not scattered, body and mind are gathered in tranquility. Tranquil¬ 
ity then attains to concentration, and the body continues to exist 
for years eternal. 

Just stay all the time with the deep source of the Tao, and you 
will naturally become a sage. Then energy pervades spirit and all 
mental projections; [12b] spirit pervades all insight and destiny. 
With destiny established and the body preserved, you can unite 



43. Gradual Dissolution 


321 


both with your true inner nature. Then you will reach an age as old 
as the sun and the moon! Your Tao is perfected! 

Preparation 

You wish now to learn the technique of refining your energy as 
described. For this, first abstain from eating all grains! Then focus 
your mind calmly on the ocean of energy, visualize the spirit in the 
Cinnabar Field, gather in your mind, and make your thoughts 
tranquil. When the ocean of energy is full, you will always feel 
naturally satiated. 

Thus you cultivate mental one-pointedness. One hundred days 
mean a minor achievement; three hundred days bring you to a 
major level. Only after this can you enter the five phases of the 
mind, and only after these are completed can you undergo the 
seven stages of the body. 

Then you will be nothing but pure spirit and numinous power, 
changing ever and ever and naturally existing throughout all the 
world’s coming and going. Whether confronting a steep cliff or a 
thousand miles’ distance, you can go or stay without obstruction. 

As long as energy does not scatter, your ocean of energy will 
always be full, your spirit will be at peace in the Cinnabar Field, 
and your body and mind will continually be stable. Naturally you 
will develop a youthful complexion, which will remain despite what¬ 
ever changes may occur in the bodily structure. Thus you become 
an immortal! Then you can appear and disappear from the ordi¬ 
nary world at will, freely pass through the all-pervading numinous 
power. You will be called “one gone beyond the world,” or a “real¬ 
ized one.” Equal in years to heaven and earth, you will be as old as 
the sun and the moon. 

This method does not require that you nourish on energy, swal¬ 
low saliva, or undergo any particular hardships. When you must 
eat, you eat; when you need rest, you rest. Thereby you live forever 
in freedom and without obstruction. 

Through the five phases of the mind and the seven stages of 
the body you duly enter the core of the Tao, using deeper concen¬ 
tration and observation. [13a] 

The Five Phases of the Mind 

1. The mind is very agitated and only rarely tranquil. With your 

thinking conditioned by a myriad different projections, you 



322 


Ascension 



Fig. 33. Refinement of Energy and Perfection of 
Spirit. Source: Xiuzhen taiji hunyuan tu. 


accept this and reject that without any constancy. Dreads and 
worries, plans and calculations keep racing on inside your mind 
like mad horses. This is the ordinary mind. 




43. Gradual Dissolution 


323 


2. The mind is somewhat tranquil and still much agitated. If, for 
once, you curb agitation and find tranquility for a moment, the 
mind scatters again immediately. You find it very hard to con¬ 
trol and subdue the mind, to curb its agitation and entangle¬ 
ment. Still, this is the first small progress toward the Tao. 

3. The mind is half agitated and half tranquil. The tranquil mind 
already resembles the unified mind, but this tranquility con¬ 
tinues to scatter. Tranquility and diffusion are about equal, 
but you have begun to pay attention to the mind’s agitation 
and entanglement. Gradually you see it getting calmer and 
more harmonious. 

4. The mind is rather tranquil and only occasionally agitated. 
You gradually succeed in gathering it in, and whenever it gets 
agitated, you check it at once. The mind becomes fully one- 
pointed, and as soon as one-pointedness is lost, you recover it 
immediately. [13b] 

5. The mind is entirely oriented toward the pure and tranquil. 
Whether involved in affairs or free from them, there is no 
agitation either way. With a powerfully controlled mind, you 
put a stop to all scattering and enter deep concentration. 

Only after you are firmly established on phase five, can you 
enter the seven stages. Just leave all to the natural process and let 
it realize itself spontaneously. There is nothing to be actively done. 

The Seven Stages of the Body 

1. All diseases you inherited from former lives gradually vanish; 
your body grows light, your mind radiant! The mind is now 
completely at peace within, the spirit is tranquil, and the en¬ 
ergy at peace. The four elements are joined in great harmony; 
the six emotions are deeply serene. 

With the mind resting peacefully in the mysterious realm, 
continue to practice one-pointedness and inner concentration. 
Then joy and exultation are daily new—this is called “realizing 
the Tao.” 

2. Now you leave the limits of ordinary life and recover a youth¬ 
ful appearance! Your body in a state of joy, your mind con¬ 
stantly at peace, you numinously attain a vision of the deep 
and mysterious. At this stage, better move to another part of 
the country, choose a spot and settle down. It is better not to 
be a too old acquaintance with the local folk. [14a] 



324 


Ascension 


3. Extend your years to a thousand: you become an immortal! As 
you travel extensively to all the famous mountains, flying or 
walking in spontaneity, azure lads are your guards and jade 
maidens your pleasure. As you step high on mist and haze, 
colored clouds support your tread. 

4. Refine your physical form to pure energy, so that it may radi¬ 
ate throughout the body. You are now a realized one! You ap¬ 
pear and disappear in the common world in accordance with 
spontaneous change. Your glittering clarity radiates of itself, 
night and day in equal brightness. With immortals in atten¬ 
dance, you traverse through grottos and palaces. 

5. Refine the energy to pure spirit and become a spirit being! 
Changing and passing on spontaneously, you are utterly bound¬ 
less, with a power that can move heaven and earth, remove 
mountains, and drain the sea. 

6. Refine the spirit to unify with the world of form and become a 
perfect one. As you numinously pervade all existence, your 
appearance and shape are no longer definite. [14b] You change 
according to occasion, appear in different forms, and go along 
with all-that-is. 

7. Finally you go beyond all beings in the body, whirl out of all 
relations! Now you can reside next to the Jade Emperor of the 
Great Tao in the numinous realm! Here the wise and sagely 
gather, at the farthest shore, in perfect truth. In creative change, 
in numinous pervasion, you reach all beings. Only with this 
level have you truly reached the source of the Tao! Here all the 
myriad paths come to an end! This is called the final ultimate! 

Warning 

People nowadays study the Tao less and less every day. They 
do not even achieve the first stage, so how would they ever realize 
the numinous pervasion of all? 

Instead, they continue to wallow in ignorance and passion, hold 
on to their defilements and personal dispositions with fierce determi¬ 
nation. As the four seasons move along in their course, their bodies 
and appearances continue to decay until they collapse and return to 
nothing. To call this “realizing the Tao”—what hypocrisy! 

On the other hand, embryo respiration together with inner 
observation allows one to preserve spirit and retain the body. These 
methods, while transmitted through lines of patriarchs, in their 
beginning were conceived and revealed by truly realized ones. 



44. Eyewitness Accounts 


325 


The methods were then preserved orally only and never put 
down in writing. If you, as a virtuous person of perfection, learn of 
them by chance, by all means be very diligent and take great care 
to preserve them! Without doubt, let only the wise and worthy 
encounter their sagely wisdom! 


44. Eyewitness Accounts 

The actual events during and surrounding an ascension into 
heaven are documented in various eyewitness accounts. Ascension, 
one finds, can be quite sudden and unexpected, a great shock to 
family and friends, and even the Taoist master might be 
flabbergasted. Then again, it may be well planned and publicly 
announced, a serious, stately transformation. 

The first case described below is that of an ordinary citizen 
who, by virtue of his solicitude and healing efforts, is granted an 
audience at the courts above. He is received together with his wife 
in a cloudy chariot, meets the immortals, and only visits the earth 
again after four hundred years. At this time he gives a first-hand 
account of his adventures. 

“The Life of Shen Xi” is taken from Ge Hong’s Shenxian zhuan 
(Biographies of Spirit Immortals) of the fourth century. The text is 
found in Daozang jinghua 5.11 (8.33ab) as well as in Yunji qiqian 
109.6b-8a. 

Then there is the case of a young and inexperienced, if very 
diligent and eager, Taoist apprentice who vanishes without a trace 
right under the noses of his astonished fellow seekers. Only his 
own words and a number of strange supernatural occurrences at 
the time indicate that he has in fact ascended and not been ab¬ 
ducted by some evil force. 

The story is contained in the Huang xianshi Qutong ji (Record 
of Immortal Master Huang and Lad Qu), which in turn is found in 
chapter 689 of the Quan Tangwen (Complete Tang Literature) (9a- 
11b). 

Third, we have the report of a Taoist priestess transforming 
herself right before her disciples. Her behavior is typical of that of 
Taoist masters in general. In addition to the common pattern, how¬ 
ever, her corpse is liberated too and ascends to heaven right through 
the ceiling. 

The account of “The Flower Maiden” comes from Du Guangting’s 
Yongcheng jixian lu (Record of the Assembled Immortals of the 



326 


Ascension 


Walled City) of the tenth century. The text appears in Yunji qiqian 
115.9b-12a. 

For translations from the Shenxian zhuan, see Giles 1948, 
Giintsch 1988. For more on the Flower Maiden, see Cahill 1990, 
Kirkland 1991. 


“The Life of Shen Xi,” from Shenxian zhuan (Biographies of 
Spirit Immortals) 

Shen Xi was a native of Wu district in Jiangsu. He studied the 
Tao in Sichuan, attaining the magical powers of dissipating calam¬ 
ity, curing disease, and bringing relief to the common people. How¬ 
ever, he knew nothing of the drugs of immortality and their use. 
Still, his virtue found favor in the sight of heaven and was duly 
recorded in the registers above. 

On one occasion, Xi and his wife. Lady Jia, were returning 
from a visit to the family of their daughter-in-law when they en¬ 
countered three chariots. One was drawn by a white deer, another 
by a green dragon, and the third by a white tiger. There were thirty 
or forty mounted attendants in dark red livery, armed with lances 
and swords. They crowded the narrow road, filling it with pomp 
and glitter. 

They inquired if he was Shen Xi. The latter, wondering what to 
make of this astounding apparition, replied, “Indeed, I am. But 
why do you ask?” 

“Mr. Shen, sir,” one of them explained, “you have deserved well 
of the people. The Tao is forever present in your heart, and from 
your earliest childhood, your conduct has been free from blame. 
However, your allotted lifespan is short and your years are ap¬ 
proaching their close. So the Yellow Venerable Lord has sent down 
three immortal officials with their chariots to escort you to heaven. 

“The gentleman in the chariot with the white deer is Bo Yanzhi, 
a palace official. 

“The gentleman in the chariot with the green dragon is Sima 
Sheng, a lord of transcendence. 

“The gentleman in the chariot with the white tiger is Xu Fu, a 
master of ceremony.” 

Presently the three immortals came forward in their feathery 
robes. They held their official tablets in their hands and bestowed 
on Shen a tablet of white jade, a green jade scepter, and a set of red 
jade characters, which he could not read. After this formal cer¬ 
emony, they took him to heaven. 



44. Eyewitness Accounts 


327 


His ascension was witnessed by a number of field laborers in 
the vicinity. They did not know what to make of it. After a little 
while there came a thick mist, and when it cleared away, the whole 
company had disappeared. All that remained were the oxen which 
had drawn Shen’s carriage. They were peacefully grazing in the 
fields. 

Someone recognized the animals as belonging to the Shen house¬ 
hold and informed his family that he and his wife had vanished. 
Fearing that they had been carried off to the deep mountains by 
evil spirits, family and servants searched in every direction for a 
hundred miles around. But they did not find them. 

Over four hundred years later, Shen Xi unexpectedly revisited 
his native village. He sought out one of his descendents, a man 
called Shen Huaixi, who explained that he had heard his elders 
speak of a certain ancestor who had become immortal. But, he said, 
this ancestor had never come back. 

Shen stayed with his descendant for about a month. During 
that time, he recounted his first experience of ascension. 

“Although I was not brought before the Emperor of Heaven 
himself,” he said, “I did get to meet the Venerable Lord, who is his 
right-hand man. The attendants instructed me not to make any 
formal acknowledgments, but simply to take my seat in silence. 

“The celestial palace seemed composed of an insubstantial, lu¬ 
minous haze, shot through with an enormous variety of colors too 
fantastic to describe. There were hundreds of attendants, mostly 
female. In the gardens grew trees bearing pearls and jade; all sorts 
of immortality herbs and magic mushrooms sprouted in great 
profusion. 

“Dragons and tigers,” he continued, “assembled in groups and 
frolicked in their midst. I could hear a tinkling sound, like that of 
copper and iron ornaments, but I’ve never discovered where it came 
from. The walls on all sides shone with a bright glow; they were 
covered with talismanic inscriptions. 

“The Venerable Lord himself was about ten feet in height. His 
hair hung loose, and he wore an embroidered robe. His entire per¬ 
son radiated light. After a while, several jade maidens brought in a 
golden table with jade goblets and set it before me. They told me 
that this was the divine cinnabar elixir. Whoever drinks it is ex¬ 
empt from death. Both my wife and I were given a cup and prom¬ 
ised a long life of ten thousand years. 

“Next we were told to make a formal obeisance to the Vener¬ 
able Lord but offer no thanks. When we had finished the divine 



328 


Ascension 


medicine, they brought us two dates as large as hens’ eggs, and 
several five-inch slices of something that looked like dried meat. 
‘Return to the world of mortals for a time,’ they told us, ‘and there 
cure the manifold diseases of humanity. Whenever you wish to 
ascend again, just write out this talisman and hang it on the end of 
a pole. Then someone will come and get you.’ 

“So they said, and handed me the talisman and an immortal 
recipe. Soon afterward I fell into a drowse. Suddenly I seemed to 
wake as if from a long sleep and found that I was back on earth. 
Many times I have tried it on sick people. The recipe really works!” 


Huang xianshi Qutongji (Record of Immortal Master Huang 
and Lad Qu) 

[9a] In Peach Spring [Taoyuan] district of Langzhou Prefec¬ 
ture, there was the Peach Blossom Monastery [Taohua quan]. Im¬ 
mortal Master Huang Dongyuan [Grotto Source, the fifteenth 
patriarch of Highest Clarity] from the Southern Peak lived there. 
He had a disciple named Qu Baiting [Cypress Garden]. 

At the early age of fourteen he had experienced great harmony. 
Although not quite rid of all craving and desires, he was in no way 
arrogant and harbored a serious determination to leave the world. 

[9b] In the fourth year of Great Succession, a year of the dog 
[770], he came from his home in Thunder Creek [Chenqi] and 
knocked his head to the ground beneath the Master’s canopy. He 
said he wished to withdraw to this sacred place of the Tao and was 
ready to do the most menial labor of slaves. 

The Immortal Master felt a deep sense of compassion and re¬ 
garded him with kindness. He took him on. 

Lad Qu had to live among the apprentice boys and children, 
yet he was extremely diligent in his service. He was rather uncomely 
and not handsome at all, but his character was unusually reverent 
and solemn. 

Every day, morning and evening, when the Immortal Master 
performed the devotions for the Tao, Lad Qu would attend to the 
rites with a grave face, burn incense, beat the musical stones, 
knock his head to the ground, and kneel immovable for extended 
periods—all as if he were approaching his father or his lord. Like 
this he went on for several years and never slackened in his 
efforts. 

Occasionally Lad Qu would also go off wandering by himself. 
He would enter grottos along the valleys and explore deep hidden 



44. Eyewitness Accounts 


329 


places. Often he would stay out for several nights in a row before 
he returned, but the Immortal Master allowed him his freedom. 

Once Lad Qu returned and said: “I have stumbled upon a most 
fascinating place. I have seen gods and sages. I have looked upon 
cloudy vapors forming fancy plants, wondrous buildings, strange 
food. All this makes me feel weak and pliant; I feel unlike myself 
somehow and not happy. Oh, Master, would you please come with 
me so we can look upon this place together?” 

“Ah, well,” the Immortal Master replied, “I’m sure the realm of 
the numinous immortals is somewhere close by. But you are still so 
young! Really, the place you have described, it can’t be all like 
this.” 

Some time later Lad Qu was among a group of disciples who 
went to the market in High Hill [Xiangyang] to purchase the ingre¬ 
dients necessary for the concoction of the elixir. Right inside the 
market gate, he was suddenly overcome by the bustle and noise of 
the trading crowd and collapsed. All went dark to his eyes so he 
couldn’t see; his spirit and energy were sluggish and as if dead 
drunk. Only after the first night of the trip home did he come 
around again. 

[10a] Asked what had happened, he raised both hands in sup¬ 
plication and said, “It has by now been a long time that people 
have lost the great simplicity of old. Common folk today wear round 
caps and square shoes. They best each other only in cheating and 
artifice; they trade with each other only for their personal profit. I 
just could not bear it.” 

The Immortal Master heard of these words and was very as¬ 
tonished. He did not, after that, dare to employ Lad Qu as a com¬ 
mon servant, but would politely ask him for his service. The 
Immortal Master even intended to go with the Lad to that immor¬ 
tals’ grotto, but due to rain and muddy paths they never made it in 
the end. 

In the summer of the eighth year [of Great Succession], a year 
of the ox [773], in the evening of a dragon day in the fifth month 
[27th], Lad Qu put on formal dress, paid reverence to the gods and 
stepped outside into the courtyard. He said that a numinous ap¬ 
pointment was waiting for him and that he could not linger much 
longer. Only when, some time in the future, the sun and the moon 
would appear together in the constellation Quail’s Head, would he 
again come back to this place. 

The Immortal Master indulged him with even more kindness, 
since he had never heard such a thing before. In his dormitory. 



330 


Ascension 


however, there was a young fellow student of his, the Taoist Zhu 
Lingbian [Numinous Deliberation], He was greatly afraid that the 
Lad’s spirit had been captured and was now under attack by an 
evil sprite. He wished to write out a talisman in cinnabar ink to 
exorcise the demon. 

Lad Qu, however, was not pleased at this. Drawing himself up 
proudly, he proclaimed: 

The various planets of time come to meet me— 

Even the yearstar is descending now! 

On the side of the courtyard, there was a huge chestnut tree, 
not more than a couple of yards from where everybody was stand¬ 
ing. Lad Qu now turned his back to the crowd and very slowly 
walked over to stand beside the tree. From there he gradually 
dissolved and vanished into thin air. [10b] When this happened, 
there was a tremendous sound, like the howling of a tornado or the 
deep rumbling of thunder. 

The Taoists were amazed and startled. Words failed them to 
describe the events. They had no idea what was happening to them. 
When they gathered themselves together again, they rushed off to 
tell the folks in the next village. All together they formed a tight 
circle and started to search for the Lad everywhere. Over a thou¬ 
sand cliffs and into deep gullies they went. But all they met was 
deadly quiet; there was not a single sound. 

Then, when they had gone west for a mile or two, they came 
across a huge snake. Majestic it was and fierce and very imposing. 
Lying right across the path with its fat belly, it was blocking their 
way. Nobody dared to go near it. 

Then again, they went to search the eastern part of the area. 
Here they found the trace of the right foot of some extraordinary 
beast with eight claws. They broke off eight poles of new bamboo 
and planted it criss-cross next to the strange footprint. 

Like this, there were a number of wondrous signs, but of Lad 
Qu not a single trace remained. 


“The Flower Maiden,” from Yoncheng jixian lu (Record of 
the Assembled Immortals of the Heavenly Walled City) 

In the ninth year of Kaiyuan [721], Huang Lingwei, known as 
the Flower Maiden, wished to ascend through transformation. So 
she said to her disciples: “My journey to immortality is coming 



44. Eyewitness Accounts 


331 



Fig. 34. On the Way to the Immortals. Source: Neijing yushu. 


close. I cannot stay here much longer. After my body has been 
transformed, do not nail my coffin shut, but just cover it with 
crimson netted gauze.” 







332 


Ascension 


The next day she came to an end without even being sick. Her 
flesh and muscles were fragrant and clear; her body and energy 
were still warm and genial. A strange fragrance filled the court¬ 
yard and halls. 

Her disciples followed her orders and did not nail the coffin 
shut. Instead, they simply covered it with crimson netted gauze. 

Suddenly they all heard a massive clap of thunder. When they 
looked at the coffin, there was a hole about as big as a hen’s egg in 
the gauze, and in the coffin itself only her shroud and some slips of 
wood were left. In the ceiling of the room, there was a hole big 
enough for a person to pass through. 

They duly presented an offering of a gourd at the place of her 
ascension. After several days it sprouted creepers and grew two 
fruits that looked like peaches. 

Each time the anniversary of her death came around, wind 
and clouds swelled up and suddenly entered the room. 



Chapter Twelve 


IMMORTAL LIFE 


Once the immortal has ascended, he or she takes up a proper 
position within the celestial hierarchy above. Ranked in nine lev¬ 
els, in close imitation of the imperial bureaucracy on earth, celestials 
are Tao-kings of various levels, rulers of the Brahma-Heavens, the 
realms for true believers, governors of the Three Worlds—of Form¬ 
lessness, of Form, and of Desire. They occupy the positions of kings, 
dukes, and ministers, and are classified according to sages, per¬ 
fected, and immortals. 

Each rank within this hierarchy has to conform to a particular 
style of dressing, using only specific colors, fabrics, and materials, 
and is obliged to appear with certain typical objects and specific 
insignia of rank and office. All this is just like the imperial bureau¬ 
cracy on earth, where every single detail of a person’s life was 
determined exactly in accordance with his rank and standing. Among 
the celestials, of course, the fabrics are much finer than their earthly 
counterparts, the utensils made from divine materials, the garb 
consisting of cloud-stuff, mists, and rays of morning light. 

Garbed and ranked properly, the immortal then has to get to 
work. There is for them no such thing as pure leisure, although 
those of higher rank enjoy that, too. As a beginner in the celestial 
spheres, the immortal will be positioned in a specific department of 
the heavenly administration, seeing to the proper organization and 
recording of events in heaven and earth. 

There is, very important, the Department of Destiny, which 
administers the lifespans and fates of human and other beings. 
There is the Department of Pestilence, which takes care of the 
proper distribution of plagues and illnesses among the living, pun¬ 
ishing the sinful and relieving the good. There is the Department 
of Rain and Wind, largely in the hands (or better, claws) of drag¬ 
ons, which is responsible for the timely appearance of the natural 
forces that make the crops grow and give the soil its rest. 


333 



334 


Immortal Life 


Then there is the Department of the Earth Prisons, also known 
as hells. This consists of ten judicial courts and affiliated prisons, 
which judge and punish the dead for their misdeeds during life. 
The last section of this Department is the Court of Rebirth, where 
people are equipped with a body for their next life, all in close 
cooperation with the Department of Destiny. Then there is the 
Celestial Treasury, where people are given the loan of life and 
where their repayments or further debts are closely monitored. 
And many others more. 

Immortals serve in these departments in various bureaucratic 
functions, gradually attaining higher rank and developing in sta¬ 
tus. The main difference from the officials in the world is that 
immortals hold more power and have more ease, that they are 
unburdened by the sorrows of physical existence, and that they 
need not to worry about the well-being of either family or ances¬ 
tors. Other than that, the rules are the same. Exemplary perfor¬ 
mance in office is lauded and rewarded with promotion, and mistakes 
are punished; serious errors may lead to banishment among mor¬ 
tals—as was the case with the Gourd Master described in Section 
16 above. 

Then again immortals, once they have served with merit in 
various offices, may take some time of leave. They may whirl around 
the heavens in free enjoyment of movement and the journey; they 
may also, for the pure fun of it, go back to the world of mortals, be 
born as emperors and kings, as court ladies or as wandering men¬ 
dicants. Already immortal to begin with, they are strange figures 
among mortals and can fiy off again any time. Immortals returning 
to the world are just as before they left it, but with a celestial 
certainty behind them that makes ascension less urgent. Given the 
toil they face in the administration above, it is small wonder that 
some, like Master Whitestone, decide to prolong their stay on mor¬ 
tal shores. 

However, even those eccentrics among immortals have the guar¬ 
antee of eternal life and the knowledge of the ultimate joy of im¬ 
mortality. They know they need only to ascend to be full members 
of the parties, banquets, and audiences among the heavenly host. 
With dragons and phoenixes dancing and singing, with the celes¬ 
tial halls decked out in miraculous splendor, with the peaches of 
immortality in full ripeness and the elixir pure ambrosia, with 
delightful jade maidens and celestial lads hovering to serve one’s 
every whim—the paradisiacal joys of the immortal life eventually 
entice even the most earth-bound back to the heavens. The admin- 



45. Celestial Garb 


335 


istration once forgotten, celestials dress up in their fancy garb and 
dance and sing to their heart’s delight. This, then, is the ultimate 
reward of the seeker’s quest, the end of the Taoist journey, the 
paradise won and never to be lost. 

The four texts below give a glimpse of these various aspects of 
immortal life. First, the Fafu kejie wen (Rules and Precepts Re¬ 
garding Ritual Garb) is an eighth-century description of the ranks, 
robes, and regalia of the heavenly host, as revealed by the Highest 
Lord to the Celestial Master. 

Second, the Lingbao tianzun shuo luku shousheng jing (Scrip¬ 
ture on the Loan for Life from the Celestial Treasury Following the 
Words of The Heavenly Venerable of Numinous 'Treasure) of the 
twelfth century outlines the workings and organization of the Ce¬ 
lestial Treasury. It specifies the sums received at birth, the amounts 
necessary for future human rebirth, and gives the names of the 
officers in charge of each transaction. It describes the workday 
routine of the lower level of immortal administration. 

Third, there are eight short biographies of immortals on earth, 
six taken from the oldest collection of immortals’ lives, the Liexian 
zhuan (Immortals’ Biographies) of the second century c.e., two more 
from the Zengxiang liexian zhuan (Illustrated Immortals’ Biogra¬ 
phies) of the thirteenth century. 

Fourth, a celestial audience, banquet, and general entertain¬ 
ment is described in the words of the Santian zhengfa jing (Scrip¬ 
ture on the Proper Law of the Three Heavens), a scripture of the 
Celestial Masters, dated to the fifth century, which is largely based 
on the worldview of Highest Clarity. 


45. Celestial Garb 

A detailed account of the proper garb and adornment of the 
celestials and their earthly Taoist counterparts is contained in the 
Fafu kejie wen (Rules and Precepts Regarding Ritual Garb). Con¬ 
sisting of the dialogue between the Celestial Master and the High¬ 
est Lord, the text claims revealed status and is set in a formal 
audience of the human master with the divine ruler. 

The Fafu wen is dated to 712. It was edited and recorded by 
the ritual master Zhang Wanfu, an important officer of Highest 
Clarity Taoism under the Tang emperor Xuanzong. The text is 
found in DZ 788, fasc. 563. 

On Zhang Wanfu and his ritual involvement with the Tang 
court, see Benn 1991. For more on the garb of the immortals, see 



336 


Immortal Life 


Schafer 1978a. On celestial fashions and their changes between the 
Han and Six Dynasties periods, see Spiro 1990. 


Fafu kejie wen (Rules and Precepts Regarding Ritual Garb) 

The Celestial Master’s Questions Regarding Ritual Garb 

[la] The Highest Lord gave the Tao to Zhang Daoling, the Law 
Master of the Three Heavens and Perfected of Orthodox Unity. 
Thereafter he ordered the jade maidens of his cloudy palace to 
emerge. They wore 

Lotus caps of ninefold radiance with precious gleam, 

Brocade robes of five colors, interwoven with cinnabar. 
Immortals’ gowns of cloudy brocade, patterned in red. 
Feathered skirts of flying brocade, light like soaring 
phoenixes. 

Brocade skirts of seven colors, made from precious cloudy 
matter. 

Embroidered slippers of green florescence, studded with 
pearls. 

They also had 

Ritual tablets of azure jasper. 

Wrappers containing the seven treasures. 

Ornate belt hangings of flowing essence. 

Ear pendants of bright carnelian. 

Sitting cushions with embroidered dragons. 

Incense burners with jasper phoenixes. 

Jade benches with intertwining dragons. 

Kingfisher whisks with variegated unicorns. 

All-wish scepters with brilliant radiance. 

Fifteen different kinds in all. 

They presented these things to the Celestial Master. 

The Celestial Master put on his formal ritual gown, cap, and 
belt. With all five limbs touching to the ground, he paid obeisance 
to the Highest Lord and asked: 

[lb] “I have not yet gotten to know the superior realm of the 
Three Clarities and all the various worlds. As for the sages, per- 




45. Celestial Garb 


337 


fected, and immortals, what differences are there in their garb? 
What ranks are there in their descent? Ignorant I am and do not 
yet understand these matters. Yet I dearly wish to know the dis¬ 
tinctions. Pray, would you give me an explanation?” 

The Highest Lord replied: 

Clothes are the outer display of the person. In accordance with 
each individual’s endowments, status and rank they differ. Each 
one has his proper observances and rites. 

Basically there are nine ranks. I’ll explain them to you. Listen 
very carefully. 

First, the Tao-King of Grand Network, the Heavenly Venerable 
of Primordial Beginning, wears 

A precious cap of ten thousand transformations and nine 
colors, 

A spontaneous-cloud robe of a thousand kinds of meeting 
and separating, 

A flowery skirt of green brocade, ten revolutions and nine 
transformations, 

A precious cape of variegated colors, sevenfold light and 
fourfold radiance. 

Pearly slippers with the ten jewels and transformations of 
the five species. 

The perfected attending him to the right and left are all attired 
in the same fashion. 

Second, the Tao-King of Jade Clarity, the Heavenly Venerable 
of No-Shape, wears 

A precious cap of one thousand transformations and seven 
colors, 

A flying-cloud robe of a hundred kinds of meeting and 
separating, 

A floating skirt of azure brocade, nine revolutions and seven 
transformations, [2a] 

A brocade cape of flowing mist, sevenfold light and fourfold 
radiance. 

Embroidered slippers with cinnabar cloud and transforma¬ 
tions of the seven treasures. 



338 


Immortal Life 


The perfected attending him to the right and left are all attired 
in the same fashion. 

Third, the Tao-King of Highest Clarity, the Heavenly Vener¬ 
able of No-Name, wears 

A precious cap of one hundred transformations and five 
colors, 

A flowing-empyrean robe of ten kinds of meeting and 
separating, 

A misty skirt of yellow brocade, eight revolutions and five 
transformations, 

A brocade cape of flying brilliance, sevenfold light and 
fourfold radiance, 

Jasper slippers of spontaneity and transformations of the 
five colors. 

The perfected attending him to the right and left are all attired 
in the same fashion. 

Fourth, the Tao-King of Great Clarity, the Heavenly Venerable 
of Great Unity, wears 

A precious cap of ten transformations and lotus essence, 

A florescent five-cloud robe of nine kinds of meeting and 
separating, 

A feathery skirt of purple brocade, seven revolutions and 
four transformations, 

A cinnabar cape of mysterious brilliance, sevenfold light and 
fourfold radiance. 

Patterned slippers of master and disciple and transforma¬ 
tions of spontaneity. 

The perfected attending him to the right and left are all attired 
in the same fashion. 

Fifth, the Elevated Rulers of the Four Brahma-Heavens, the 
Heavenly Venerables of Non-Appearance, wear 

Flowery caps of flowing essence and radiant sunlight, 

Bejeweled robes with dark phoenix patterns. 

Flying skirts of bluegreen brocade with cinnabar feathers. 



Fig. 35. A Taoist God in Full Regalia. Source: 
Neijing yushu. 






340 


Immortal Life 


[2a] Precious capes of planetary clouds and fivefold light, 

Slippers of flying dragons transformations. 

The perfected attending them to the right and left are all at¬ 
tired in the same fashion. They may also be attired in 

Purple robes with green skirts, 

Azure robes with cinnabar skirts. 

Green robes with light red skirts. 

Cinnabar robes with yellow skirts. 

Yellow robes with plain skirts. 

And skirts of deep red brocade with dragon patterns. 

All these are the outfits worn by the perfected in attendance. 

Above the four Brahma-Heavens, all garments are made from 
flying clouds and floating mists, pure spontaneity and wondrous 
energy. They are brought forth from the precious radiance of the 
nine colors. There are a myriad varieties, long and short, big and 
small. All are coordinated with their specific position in due accor¬ 
dance with their rank. 

Some are so bright that they radiate in the eight directions, 
filling all with their pervading brilliance. Their celestial luminosity 
reaches far and near; pure transformations they are of spontaneity. 
Others again are made form the nine radiances and their bril¬ 
liance, splintered into ten thousand facets. 

Then again there are some thickly embroidered with dragons 
and phoenixes, with the flowing shapes of mountains and rivers. 
Changing a thousand times and transforming ten thousand times, 
they cannot be described. 

Now, as for the 

cities and townships, 

palaces and halls, 

towns and terraces, 

plants and animals, 

carriages and utensils, 

pennants and awnings, 

and all kinds of ritual implements— 

They are all made from pure spontaneity and appear in accor¬ 
dance with prevailing causes. None of them have any material 
solidity whatsoever. They appear and disappear without constancy. 
[3a] 



45. Celestial Garb 


341 


Sixth, the immortals, perfected, and sages of the Heavens of 
Formlessness and their heavenly emperors wear 

Precious caps of flying clouds. 

Unsewed robes of the nine colors. 

Flowery skirts with bluegreen dragon patterns. 

Brocade capes of the five colors, 

Jasper slippers with auspicious phoenixes. 

These are all brought forth by spontaneity itself As you try to 
think of them, they disappear. 

As regards their 
palaces and halls, 
terraces and towers, 
carriages and utensils, 
toys and ornaments, 
gardens and flowers, 

musical instruments and other ritual implements— 

You should know that they are all just like this. 

Seventh, the various immortals, perfected, and sages of the 
Heavens of Form and their heavenly emperors wear 

Morning-light caps of lotus flowers. 

Brocade robes of flying clouds. 

Flying skirts of dark red mist. 

Brocade capes of flowing planet light. 

Patterned slippers with jasper phoenixes. 

Even though things here have form and a certain solidity, still 
they are in nothing like those produced on earth. They are rather 
like those made from pure spontaneity. 

As regards their residences, carriages, and other implements, 
imagine them just as you like. They will come to life in your medi¬ 
tation. However, they do keep changing of their own accord and do 
not compare to anything permanent. 

Eighth, the various immortals, perfected, and sages of the World 
of Desire wear 



342 


Immortal Life 


Caps of pearls and jade, [3b] 

Robes of the five clouds, 

Azure skirts of flying florescence. 

Feathery capes of flowing light. 

Patterned slippers with the nine radiances. 

All that arises in this world is either taken directly from the 
various heavens or received from the spirit immortals. Thus their 
products are not the same. In this lower world, there is labor and 
toil. 

As regards their residences and halls, carriages and other imple¬ 
ments, they are also like this. 

Ninth, all the spirit immortals, divine representatives, and per¬ 
fected officials as well as the guardians of the earth and other 
celestial administrators residing in the numinous places on the 
mountains as well as within the grotto heavens of the five and 
others sacred peaks wear 

Caps studded with the seven treasures. 

Misty robes of the nine radiances. 

Flowery skirts of flying green color. 

Embroidered capes of cloudy brocade. 

Patterned slippers with phoenixes on them. 

These garments are all made from fine silks and brocades, 
which are brought forth in the various heavens and ornamented 
with the precious objects of the lower regions. Often they are pro¬ 
duced by transformational refinement, in no way like anything 
made in the human world. 

The divine personages themselves stride on phoenixes and 
cranes, put dragons to the reins and tigers, white deer and won¬ 
drous lions, an entire host of numinous beasts and divine birds. 
They ride in chariots of floating clouds and with jasper wheels; 
they hold up streamers and display their staffs, grasp talismans 
and present their registers. [4a] Thus they arrive anywhere on 
impulse—rising up as perfected and immortals, or descending to 
teach and to transform [the world]. In all cases, they are garbed 
according to occasion, just as is the custom among humanity. 

Then again they may descend as perfected and immortals or 
rise up to pay court to the rulers of the heavens. Whatever they 
wear and ride is part of the higher realms and changes with true 



46. The Administration of Heaven 


343 


spontaneity. Indeed, you will find your senses reel; it is too im¬ 
measurable. 


46. The Administration of Heaven 

Immortals serve in the celestial administration of heaven and 
earth, beginning as low-level clerks and serving their way up, just 
as in the bureaucracies of this world. The lowest administrative 
level is that of hell, where the souls of sinners are prepared for 
rebirth. 

Hell in Chinese religion is a concept integrated from Buddhism. 
According to ancient Chinese beliefs, the souls of the dead assembled 
in an underworld country, known as the Yellow Springs. During the 
Han dynasty, with the establishment of an all-encompassing impe¬ 
rial administration, the abode of the dead was associated with 
merit and demerit. It was then located to Mount Taishan in Shan¬ 
dong and linked with the north, the realm of pure yin. 

Only with the spread of Buddhism did ideas of organized hells 
and punishments develop in China. In Highest Clarity, for the first 
time there are the six palaces of the dead in Fengdu, where sinners 
are judged and can expiate their evil deeds. Later, ten integrated 
courts of hell developed as well as a detailed bureaucratic system 
linking the fate of the individual with his or her constellation of 
birth. 

The Lingbao tianzun shuo luku shousheng jing (Scripture on 
the Loan for Life from the Celestial Treasury Following the Words 
of the Heavenly Venerable of Numinous Treasure) is a popular 
document of the Southern Song (twelfth century), which describes 
the fate of the individual in monetary terms. Everyone receives a 
loan from the Celestial Treasury in order to come to life. This loan 
has to be repaid by good deeds and in spirit money; otherwise, one 
will fall ever deeper into debt and thus unhappiness and hell. 

The text is contained in DZ 333, fasc. 167. It is set in the 
context of a celestial audience that the Heavenly Venerable of 
Numinous Treasure gives to his ample court. Written in a flowery 
dialogue style, it is patterned on Mahayana Buddhist sutras. Its 
ideas can be related to the emergence of a full-fledged monetary 
economy in the twelfth century, but are still popular today. 

For a French translation and detailed analysis of the celestial 
treasury, see Hou 1976. For an English summary and review, see 
Seidel 1978. On the celestial administration in ancient China, see 



344 


Immortal Life 


Levi 1989. For more on Chinese hells, see Eberhard 1967, Goodrich 
1981, Thompson 1989. 


Lingbao tianzun shuo luku shousheng jing (Scripture on 
the Loan for Life from the Celestial Treasury Following the 
Words of the Heavenly Venerable of Numinous Treasure) 

[la] At that time the Heavenly Venerable of Numinous Trea¬ 
sure was in the World of Floating Network, in the Land of Pure 
Brightness. He was sitting under the Tree of the Seven Treasures 
on the Mountain of Good Accumulated. With him were innumer¬ 
able followers: flying celestials and divine kings, countless immor¬ 
tals and the host of the sages. Thus he proceeded to preach the 
wondrous Law. 

The Venerable emitted a brilliant radiance of the nine colors. It 
illuminated all the ten directions. Living beings everywhere were 
receiving good and bad retribution for their deeds, whether noble 
or humble, rich or poor. 

The great host were astonished that all living beings would 
equally receive such karmic retribution, but they did not dare to 
ask about it. 

At that time there was a perfected called Radiant Wondersound. 
Rising from his seat, he straightened his cap and gown, knocked his 
head on the ground, and prostrated himself before the Presence. 

“My lord,” he addressed the Heavenly Venerable, “we have just 
been so fortunate as to witness how Your majestic radiance illumi¬ 
nates all the ten directions. Whether man or woman, whether rich 
or poor, whether noble or humble—all receive suffering and happi¬ 
ness in different measure. Why is it that all living beings are sub¬ 
ject to such variety in karmic retribution? 

“Bowing down low, I pray to Your sagely grace. Oh, have com¬ 
passion for our need and bestow upon us Your valuable instruc¬ 
tion!” 

[IbJ The Heavenly Venerable said: 

“Very good! Very good indeed! Sit back down, please. Then 
compose yourself, calm your spirit, concentrate your mind, and 
listen carefully!” 

The Heavenly Venerable said: 

“All living beings of the ten directions in their fate depend on 
the officials of heaven; in their bodies they are subject to the ad¬ 
ministration of earth. The day anyone receives a human body, he or 
she is registered with the administration of earth. 



46. The Administration of Heaven 


345 


“The underworld officials at this time lend him or her a sum 
for receiving life, a loan from the Celestial Treasury. The more 
people save on their account in the underworld, the richer and 
nobler they will be on earth. 

“Those who are poor and humble are debtors who never repay. 
They get in worse from kalpa to kalpa, since the underworld offi¬ 
cials have to borrow on the account [every time they are reborn]. In 
the case of those who are impoverished in the world of humanity, 
the underworld officials have already used up all the yang credit 
and are now supplying the account with yin. 

“Thus it is that in the world there are differences in retribu¬ 
tion between noble and humble, rich and poor, happy and miser¬ 
able. Consider it well!” 

The Heavenly Venerable said: 

“Once in the past I presented a Treasure Tree to High High¬ 
ness, the Northern Emperor in Fengdu. He planted it in his Dark 
Capital to help him judge more clearly the good and bad retribu¬ 
tion coming to all living beings. [2a] 

“Whenever someone is about ready to be reborn with a human 
body, he takes three sagely arrows and three divine bows and hands 
them to the man or woman in question. He then lets them shoot at 
the Treasure Tree. 

“If they hit the eastern branch of the tree, they will be reborn 
in a long-lived body and with high position and income. 

“If they hit the southern branch of the tree, they will be reborn 
in a very healthy body and with exceptional longevity. 

“If they hit the western branch of the tree, they will be reborn 
in a beautiful body and with riches and honors. 

“If they hit the northern branch of the tree, they will be reborn 
in a miserable body and with humility and poverty. 

“Thus this Treasure Tree as We just described is a very useful 
mirror to judge people’s karmic standing and necessary retribution. 

“Those who, in this life, properly venerate the Three Trea¬ 
sures, give ample donations, organize rituals, chant the scriptures, 
and perform all manner of good deeds—those, in other words, who 
follow Our teaching and conscientiously recite this scripture and 
burn spirit money to repay their celestial loan for life—they will all 
be born in male bodies for three lives to come. 

“Also, when they die again, they will not fall into the earthly 
prisons [hell]. And, when they are ready to be fitted with their next 
body in Fengdu and get to shoot at the Treasure Tree, We will 
personally use Our divine powers to prevent them from hitting the 



346 


Immortal Life 


northern branch. This way they will definitely be born again in a 
strong body and with noble rank. 

“Those, on the other hand, who in this life are avaricious and 
greedy, foolhardy and obstinate, do not believe in the scriptures 
and the Law, [2b] never make any payments on their debt, are 
jealous and envious of others, fail to remember doing good and only 
perform evil deeds, will be listed among the registers of sinners. 
The officials of Heaven will subtract from their account and their 
debt will mount. 

“The fact is, those who do not repay the loan they received for 
their life from the underworld officials and cheat other people into 
the bargain upon death will fall into the earthly prisons. Only after 
ten thousand kalpas [of punishment] will they be reborn, and then 
only as wild beasts or domestic animals. Only over many life cycles 
will their karma improve again. 

“When such people then arrive in Fengdu and are ready to 
shoot their arrow at the Treasure Tree, they will naturally hit 
the northern branch. They have at this point reached the human 
stage, but they are still impoverished and humble. Such is the 
retribution for those who do not believe in the karma of good 
deeds.” 

The perfected again addressed the Heavenly Venerable: “It is 
not quite clear to me yet which department each human being in 
his or her life is subject to. Which division of the Celestial Treasury 
gives out his or her loan for life? And to which division of the 
Treasury should he or she repay it? 

“Your venerable explanation was superbly enlightening. How¬ 
ever, in my ignorance I have not perfectly understood this point. 
May I count myself so fortunate as to receive in Your gracious 
answer a clear distinction between the different cases?” 

The Heavenly Venerable said: 

“The life of humanity is administered by officials. They are 
arranged in divisions according to a twelve-year roster. [3a] In each 
of the divisions, there is one senior administrator particularly re¬ 
sponsible for the Treasury. 

“I shall now give you the divisions, the names of the officials, 
and the sums paid out in each case. 

“People born in the year of the rat owe 13,000 strings of cash to 
the first division of the Treasury. The official in charge is named Li 
[Plum]. 



46. The Administration of Heaven 


347 


“People born in the year of the ox owe 20,000 strings of cash to 
the second division of the Treasury. The official in charge is named 
Tian (FieldJ. 



Fig. 36. A Celestial Official. Source: Shangqing lingbao 
dafa. 



348 


Immortal Life 


“People born in the year of the tiger owe 80,000 strings of cash 
to the third division of the Treasury. The official in charge is named 
Lei [Thunder], 

“People born in the year of the hare owe 80,000 strings of cash 
to the fourth division of the Treasury. The official in charge is 
named Li [Willow]. 

“People born in the year of the dragon owe 50,000 strings of 
cash to the fifth division of the Treasury. The official in charge is 
named Yuan [Robe]. 

“People born in the year of the snake owe 70,000 strings of 
cash to the sixth division of the Treasury. The official in charge is 
named Ji [Record]. 

“People born in the year of the horse owe 260,000 strings of 
cash to the seventh division of the Treasury. The official in charge 
is named Xu [Permit], 

“People born in the year of the sheep owe 100,000 strings of 
cash to the eighth division of the Treasury. The official in charge is 
named Zhu [Red], [3b] 

“People born in the year of the monkey owe 40,000 strings of 
cash to the ninth division of the Treasury. The official in charge is 
named Che [Cart], 

“People born in the year of the rooster owe 50,000 strings of 
cash to the tenth division of the Treasury. The official in charge is 
named Zheng. 

“People born in the year of the dog owe 25,000 strings of cash 
to the eleventh division of the Treasury. The official in charge is 
named Cheng [Perfect], 

“People born in the year of the boar owe 9,000 strings of cash 
to the twelfth division of the Treasury. The official in charge is 
named Gang [Neck].” 

The Heavenly Venerable said: 

“These twelve officials of the Treasury supervise the registers 
of the celestial loan for people’s current life. In addition, anyone 
who has obtained a human body should pledge a certain sum [to be 
used at rebirth] to the original constellation under which he or she 
has been born. This, too, should be entered in the account registers 
of their celestial loan as well as in the records of the underworld 
officials.” 

The perfected rose again and asked another question. “I am,” 
he said, “as yet unaware of the names, position, and sums involved 



46. The Administration of Heaven 


349 


in the pledges to the original constellations. May I again presume 
upon Your grace to grant me an explanation?” 

The Heavenly Venerable smiled fondly and said; 

“Excellent! You do indeed exhaust your strength for the benefit 
of all that lives. 

“I will gladly explain to you the adminstration of the twelve 
original constellations, the sums involved in the pledge, and the 
names of the officers in charge. [4a] 

“People born in the year of the rat have Liu Wenzhen as con¬ 
stellation officer. They need to pledge 7,000 strings of cash toward 
renewed human rebirth. 

“People born in the year of the ox have Meng Hou as constella¬ 
tion officer. They need to pledge 9,000 strings of cash toward re¬ 
newed human rebirth. 

“People born in the year of the tiger have Zhong Yuan as con¬ 
stellation officer. They need to pledge 6,000 strings of cash toward 
renewed human rebirth. 

“People born in the year of the hare have He Yuan as constella¬ 
tion officer. They need to pledge 10,000 strings of cash toward 
renewed human rebirth. 

“People born in the year of the dragon have Li Wenliang as 
constellation officer. They need to pledge 6,400 strings of cash to¬ 
ward renewed human rebirth. 

“People born in the year of the snake have Cao Jiao as constel¬ 
lation officer. They need to pledge 1,000 strings of cash toward 
renewed human rebirth. 

“People born in the year of the horse have Zhang Si as constel¬ 
lation officer. They need to pledge 9,000 strings of cash toward 
renewed human rebirth. 

“People born in the year of the sheep have Sun Gong as con¬ 
stellation officer. They need to pledge 4,000 strings of cash toward 
renewed human rebirth. [4b] 

“People born in the year of the monkey have Du Zhun as con¬ 
stellation officer. They need to pledge 8,000 strings of cash toward 
renewed human rebirth. 

“People born in the year of the rooster have Tian Jiaoyou as 
constellation officer. They need to pledge 5,000 strings of cash to¬ 
ward renewed human rebirth. 

“People born in the year of the dog have Cui Jianjin as constel¬ 
lation officer. They need to pledge 5,000 strings of cash toward 
renewed human rebirth. 



350 


Immortal Life 


“People born in the year of the boar have Wang Zhuang as 
constellation officer. They need to pledge 6,000 strings of cash to¬ 
ward renewed human rebirth.” 

The Heavenly Venerable announced to the host of the four 
classes: 

“Good people of the world, be they men or women, should take 
joy in the scriptures and the Law, give ample donations and pro¬ 
vide money for the needy. They should rely on this scripture and 
set up religious ceremonies, performing proper worship by burning 
incense, scattering flowers, lighting lamps and burning candles. 

“With serious reverence they should pay obeisance to the Three 
Treasures and the Great Tao, venerate the countless immortals and 
the host of the sages. In all the six periods they should practice the 
rites of the Tao, turn and chant the scriptures, observe the fasts and 
make the proper sacrifices. They should furthermore prepare a sum of 
money to repay the celestial loan for their present life and set aside a 
sum to be pledged to their original constellation for human rebirth. 

“To this end they should take the matching tablets for both sums 
and burn them to transfer the sums to the appropriate 
division of the Treasury. [5a] If they do all this, they will in retribution 
receive great good fortune, gloiy, and honor in this life. Even in the 
lives to come they will never suffer hardships or be bent by trouble. 

“Those among living beings, however, who do not believe in 
predetermination through karmic causes but, on the contrary, pro¬ 
duce nothing but bad karma, will fall into the depth of the Nine 
Springs [hell]. There they will suffer terribly. 

“Such is the retribution of happiness and misery in life and 
death. Consider it well!” 

At that time, the perfected Radiant Wondersound together with 
the countless immortals and the host of the sages, including also 
Yama, the Northern Emperor of Fengdu, the underworld officials 
and administrators of the Celestial Treasury, the officers of the 
original constellations—everyone in the huge assembly—knelt to 
knock their heads on the ground, then raised their eyes to the 
Venerable Countenance. Then they withdrew with proper ceremony. 

Thereafter the perfected Radiant Wondersound transmitted the 
teaching to the world of humanity. With it he is saving both the 
living and the dead. 


Praise and spread the wonderful teaching! 
Believe and practice! 



47. Sojourn Among Mortals 


351 


47. Sojourn Among Mortals 

The way immortals behave in the world after they have al¬ 
ready ascended is documented in a variety of collections on their 
lives. Usually coming down for a short visit, they put affairs to 
right and help out mortals in unexpected ways. Eccentric and 
otherwordly in every way, their lives yet remain linked, at least at 
times, with the events and affairs of this world. 

The Liexian zhuan (Immortals’ Biographies) is the oldest col¬ 
lection of such immortals’ adventures that has come down to us. 
Originally written by the Han-dynasty official Liu Xiang (77-76 
B.C.E.), the text was lost and later reassembled. The edition extant 
today can be dated to the second century c.e. The text consists of 
eighty short sketches of immortals’ lives. It is contained in DZ 294, 
fasc. 138. 

The Zengxiang liexian zhuan (Illustrated Immortals’ Biogra¬ 
phies) is a Yuan-dynasty collection, extant in a Qing edition. It 
contains fifty-five biographies of immortals with a characteristic 
picture for each. In addition the text has a chapter with selections 
from various Taoist scriptures, illuminating the Taoist path and 
worldview of the immortals. 

For a complete translation of the Liexian zhuan with exten¬ 
sive and detailed annotation, see Kaltenmark 1953. For selec¬ 
tions of immortals’ biographies from a variety of collections, see 
Giles 1948. For the problems of human historians with immor¬ 
tals returning, see DeWoskin 1990. For some examples of the 
appearance and behavior of immortals in more recent years, see 
Blofeld 1973. 


Liexian zhuan (Immortals’ Biographies) 

The Yellow Emperor 

The Yellow Emperor [Huangdil was personally called Xianyuan. 
He ruled the hundred gods, who would all pay homage to him and 
serve his every whim. 

Even when only a small child, he was already able to speak. 
Later he developed sageliness and could foretell the future. He 
would understand the deep inherent structure of all things. 

He was also the Master of Clouds, and as such had the body of 
a dragon. 

Choosing for himself the day of his disappearance from the 
world, he said farewell to his courtiers and his people. After his 
death, he was buried on Bridge Mountain. 



352 


Immortal Life 


Later, there was a landslide on the mountain and his tomb 
split open. However, there was no corpse in the coffin. Only his 
sword and slippers remained. 

The Immortal Scripture says: 

The Yellow Emperor mined copper on Head Mountain and 
melted it into tripods at the foot of Mount Thorn. When the tripods 
were finished, a dragon, with whiskers streaming, descended to 
receive him into heaven. 

The emperor duly strode on the dragon’s back and up they 
went. 

His numerous courtiers and ministers, who were standing by, 
immediately grabbed hold of the dragon’s whiskers so they would 
be borne up, too. Some even got hold of the emperor’s bow. How¬ 
ever, after some time, the dragon’s whiskers came loose and the 
emperor’s bow dropped to the ground. 

In the end, the courtiers and ministers thus did not manage to 
follow him into heaven. Watching their sovereign rise up higher 
and higher, they broke into loud cries of lamentation. 

For this reason, later generations called the place of the 
emperor’s ascension the “Tripod Lake” and named his bow the “Cry 
of Lament.” 

Lord Horsemaster 

Lord Horsemaster [Mashi Huang] was a horse doctor in the 
time of the Yellow Emperor. He knew the vital symptoms in a 
horse’s constitution, and on receiving his treatment the animal 
would immediately get well. 

Once a dragon flew down and approached him with drooping 
ears and open jaws. Horsemaster said to himself, “This dragon is ill 
and knows that I can help him.” 

Thereupon he inserted an acupuncture needle in its mouth 
just below the upper lip and gave it a decoction of sweet herbs to 
swallow. The dragon promptly recovered. 

Afterwards, whenever the dragon was ailing, it issued from its 
watery lair and presented itself for treatment. One morning the 
dragon came, took Huang on its back and bore him away. 

The Fluteplayer 

The Fluteplayer [Xiao Shi] lived under the reign of Lord Mu of 
Qin. He was so good at playing the flute that he could attract 
peacocks and white cranes to the palace gardens. 



47. Sojourn Among Mortals 


353 


Lord Mu had a daughter by the name of Playful Jade. Playful 
Jade loved the Fluteplayer, and Lord Mu duly consented to their 
marriage. 

Every day the Fluteplayer would teach his wife how to imitate 
the cry of the phoenix. After several years, she could indeed make a 
sound very much like that of the phoenix. 

At that time, two of the sacred birds, a male and a female, 
alighted on one of the palace buildings. Lord Mu appropriately 
changed its name to “Phoenix Terrace.” 

The young couple went to live there and did not leave it for 
several years. One day, they both followed the phoenix pair and 
flew off. 

Later the people of Qin established a shrine to the “Phoenix 
Lady” in their capital. Still today, from time to time, one can hear 
the Fluteplayer’s song! 

Master Anqi 

Master Anqi came from Fu village in Langya district of the 
Shandong peninsula. He used to sell drugs on the shore of the 
Eastern Sea. His contemporaries all called him Old Father Thou¬ 
sand Years. 

When the First Emperor of the Qin dynasty made a journey to 
the East, he sought an interview with Anqi and lingered talking 
with him for three days and three nights. The emperor then be¬ 
stowed on him enormous amounts of gold and precious jewels. 

On his departure, however, Anqi left the gifts in the village 
office together with a letter to the emperor. Here he said that he 
considered himself sufficiently rewarded with a pair of red jade 
slippers. He then added: “In a few years, come to look for me on the 
paradise island of Penglai!” 

The First Emperor lost no time in sending out to sea an expe¬ 
dition numbering several hundred people, led by Xu Shi and Lu 
Sheng. However, they never reached Penglai, because they encoun¬ 
tered violent storms which caused them to turn back. 

Shrines in honor of Master Anqi have been set up since in a 
dozen places along the coast near Fu village. 

The Hairy Lady 

The Hairy Lady [MaoniiJ, also known as Jade Mistress, has 
been seen by hunters on Mount Hua for several generations. Her 
body is covered with hair. 



Fig. 37. Master Anqi on His Way to Sell Medicines. Source: Zengxiang 
liexian zhuan. 




47. Sojourn Among Mortals 


355 


She claims that she was among the palace ladies of the First 
Emperor and first fled to the mountain during the troubles that 
attended the downfall of the Qin dynasty. 

There she encountered the Taoist recluse Spring Valley [Gu 
Chun], who taught her how to live on pine needles. As a result of 
this diet, she became immune from cold and hunger, and her body 
became so light that it seemed to fly. 

For over 170 years the mountain grotto where she makes her 
home has resounded with the thrumming of her zither. 

Dongfang Shuo 

Dongfang Shuo came from Yanci village in Pingyuan district of 
the Shandong peninsula. For a long time he lived south of the Yangzi 
as a schoolmaster. After thirty years or so, under the reign of the 
Martial Emperor of the Former Han dynasty, he sent in a memorial 
on the needs of the state and was given a special court appointment. 

By the time of the Brilliant Emperor, some people thought he 
was an inspired sage; others found him a common fellow. His be¬ 
havior showed a strange combination of depth and shallowness, 
openness and reserve. No one knew exactly when he was speaking 
from his heart and when he was merely jesting. 

At the beginning of the reign of the Open Emperor, Dongfang 
Shuo left his post in order to escape from the disorders of the age. 
He put down his official cap and quit his stately residence, drifting 
away to wherever chance might take him. Later he was seen in 
Guiji, selling drugs in the region of the five lakes. 

Among wise men some suspected that he was really an incar¬ 
nation of the essence of the planet Jupiter. 


Zengxiang liexian zhuan (Illustrated Immortals’ Biographies) 

The Hemp Lady 

The Hemp Lady [Magu] was the younger sister of the immor¬ 
tal Wang Fangping. Under Emperor Huan of the Han dynasty, 
Wang descended from heaven to visit the family of Cai Jing. 

He told him: “You have the ability to go beyond the world. This 
is why I have come today to teach you. However, your energy is low 
and your flesh is strong. Therefore you cannot ascend bodily into 
heaven, but rather have to prepare yourself for deliverance from 
the corpse.” 



Fig. 38. The Hemp Lady and Her Deer. Source: Zengxiang liexian zhuan. 







47. Sojourn Among Mortals 


357 


Wang duly gave him essential instructions and left again. 

Later Jing developed a fever that seemed to burn his entire 
body. After three days his flesh began to dissolve so that his bones 
were sticking out. Lying down in his bedroom, he covered himself 
with a blanket, when he vanished all of a sudden. His relatives 
looked in and found only a shell under the blanket, somewhat like 
the skin of a cicada. 

Over ten years later he unexpectedly returned to his family. 
He told them: “On the seventh day of the seventh month. Lord 
Wang will grace our house with his presence. We should prepare 
several hundred pitchers of wine to feast him.” 

On the appointed day Wang indeed arrived, floating down from 
heaven. He was sitting in a carriage drawn by flve dragons. Preced¬ 
ing and following him were attendants carrying banners and flags, 
as if he was a five-star general. As soon as he had landed, the 
entourage vanished. 

Jing and his family duly paid their formal respects to the visi¬ 
tor. After that, Wang sent off someone to invite his sister, the Hemp 
Lady. When she arrived, all found her a young girl of about eight¬ 
een years. She wore her hair tied into a topknot on the top of her 
head, but some stands were left untied and flowed down well to her 
waist. She wore a robe of brocade and a wide embroidered skirt, 
with colors so bright and radiant they dazzled the eye. 

When everybody had taken their seats, a fantastic banquet on 
dishes of gold and jade was served, including such delicacies as 
unicorn meat. 

At the time Jing’s wife had just given birth. When the Hemp 
Lady saw her, she immediately said: “Ah! Please stop and don’t 
come near me!” Then she asked for a bit of rice, which she spread 
all over the floor. As soon as it hit the ground, every grain turned 
into cinnabar. 

Wang laughed when he saw this. “Oh, my dear sister,” he said, 
“you still play the games of a child!” 

“Well, after all,” the Hemp Lady responded, “since we’ve last 
seen each other the Eastern Sea has only changed three times into 
mulberry fields. And now the waters around Penglai are already 
growing shallow again!” 

“Indeed,” Wang agreed. “All the sages are saying that the sea 
is turning to dust again soon!” 

The Hemp Lady had hands that looked like the claws of a bird. 
Seeing them, Cai thought to himself, “If one had an itch on the 
back, wouldn’t it be nice to be scratched by these claws!” 



358 


Immortal Life 


Wang immediately read his thoughts and was furious. He turned 
to whip his host, scolding him: “The Hemp Lady is a divine person¬ 
age! How could you even think other claws scratching your back?” 

Soon after, Wang left and the Hemp Lady too took her leave. 

(2.11b) 

Master Whitestone 

Master Whitestone [Baishi sheng] was a disciple of the vener¬ 
able Master Middleyellow [Zhong Huang]. In the days of the long- 
lived Pengzu, he was already more than two thousand years old. 
However, he had no longing to ascend to heaven; instead he aspired 
only to a long life on earth. 

Among drugs he preferred liquid gold, but his family was poor 
and he could not obtain it. So he raised pigs and herded sheep, and 
after about ten years had amassed a fortune of ten thousand pieces 
of gold. This enabled him to buy the drug and take it. 

Later it was his habit to boil white stones and use them for 
food. This led him to make his home on Whitestone Mountain. 
Thus he was called Master Whitestone. Sometimes he would also 
eat dried meat; then again he would abstain from all grains. 

He was able to walk as far as three or four hundred miles in 
one day. Though hundreds of years old, he still looked like he was 
about thirty. When someone asked him why he did not wish to 
ascend to heaven, he replied: “I’m not at all sure I should enjoy 
myself as much in heaven as I do in this world right here!” (1.17b) 


48. Feasting in Paradise 

The ultimate joy of the immortal life is the easy, leisurely 
feasting among the crowd of the celestials. Imperial lords invite to 
fancy banquets, dragons and phoenixes sing and dance, jade maid¬ 
ens and celestial lads serve divine snacks—a life of delight and 
beauty, of song and pure joy. 

The Santian zhengfa jing (Scripture on the Proper Law or the 
Three Heavens) as we have it today, contained in DZ 1203, fasc. 
876, is a text of the Celestial Masters of the fifth century. Its origi¬ 
nal version was part of the revelations of Highest Clarity and con¬ 
tained the eschatology of this school. 

Today the text begins with a description of the origins of the 
nine heavens, the creation of the world and of humanity, and the 



Fig. 39. Master Whitestone on His Mountain. Source: Zengxiang liexian 
zhuan. 





360 


Immortal Life 


proper establishment of the gods. It continues with an audience 
given by the Highest Lord to his two favorite advisers, Lord 
Goldtower and the Green Lad, both important deities of Highest 
Clarity. The audience takes the form of a celestial banquet, during 
which the three lords engage in joyful song. 

On the text, see Robinet 1984. For more on the delights of the 
heavenly halls, see Kroll 1985. 


Santian zhengfa jing (Scripture on the Proper Law or the 
Three Heavens) 

[3b] The Imperial Lord Goldtower, the Latter-Day Sage, and 
the Lord Green Lad, the First Minister, three times in every month, 
at the time of the pure fasts, climb into a cloudy chariot. It is made 
from blue and rosy tinged clouds mixed with the flowing light of 
the nine numina. It is covered with a canopy of green feathers. 
Following the thousand perfected of Mulberry Forest, they ascend 
to the palace of the highest numinous capital. There they pay hom¬ 
age to the Perfected Father and attend various feasts in the gar¬ 
dens of jade. 

The Highest Lord of the Great Tao at one such time was with 
the Sagely Lord of Ninefold Mystery [Goldtower] and with the Lord 
Green Lad, the First Minister. Together they climbed up the Jade 
Hall in the Jasper Palace. Serving maids waited upon them—they 
numbered several billion. Flying dragons and poisonous beasts stood 
guard at the numinous portals. Huge scaly dragons, thousands of 
feet long, spread their claws as wide as the entire garden. Flowing 
radiance shone brightly in the eight directions, brilliantly illumi¬ 
nating the entire Heaven of Jade Clarity. Banners and canopies 
were hanging from the walls; flags were flowing as incense wafted 
throughout. 

Soon jade pipes began to sing in the vast emptiness. The dense 
crowd of divine beings raised [their voices] in sound. Ten thousand 
echoes swelled the music so it pervaded and delighted even the 
Nine Primes. While the host of immortals yodeled away their cloudy 
songs, unicorns danced and phoenixes cooed. A magnificent concert 
rose, an offering to the kings in emptiness. Its jasper quality moved 
all and everything throughout the Three Clarities. 

The company was served with sweet wine from flowing rosy 
clouds and with fruits shining like metal and diamonds. Variously 
they listened to the ongoing flow of the variegated streams and 
looked out even beyond the end of the great dark sea. 



48. Feasting in Paradise 


361 


[4a] Then the Highest Lord pulled over a zither stringed with 
cloud and jade. He strung it and began to play. The emerging jade 
sound was so splendid in its full radiant beauty that it pervaded 
the great empyrean. Then he sang a verse on the divine phoenix, a 
poem on the nine numina. The song went: 

Subtler than the energy of ninefold mystery, 

They pervade the depth of the Three Clarities. 

All wondrous transformations go with life’s eternal cycle. 

As the sounds of the abyss penetrate on-high. 

Sixfold awareness begins with the mysterious pass; 

Not yet clear, it is just beginning. 

Leading gradually up to the Jade Emperor’s garden. 

It opens up the principles of Great Emptiness. 

The purple light irradiates the Terrace of Mystery, 

A flowing brightness, infinite and without end. 

Even a great kalpa has its end well numbered: 
Hundred-and-Six—it turns over and begins anew. 

The pleasure of the gods is not limited in years. 

We cherish and we grieve—for our late-born children. 

With this, the song of the Highest Lord ended. The Imperial 
Lord of Ninefold Mystery took up the theme. He sang, 

I take my whip and grasp the reins of the nine dragons. 

Ride up to visit the Jade Emperor’s gardens. 

Great Emptiness and its energy of ninefold mystery 
Transform as patterned through all three numina. 

Above I join the tower of mysterious morning light 
Where all bodies and lives receive their first prime essence. 

[4b] Then I move on to the Hall of Great Cloud’s Glow, 

Let my glance flow on to years infinite. 

Divine light penetrates even the passes of deep darkness. 
Purifies the womb, restores the body’s strength. 

We cherish and we grieve for the five sons of the turbid 
And let our lives flow along with the morning’s newly born. 



362 


Immortal Life 


With this, the song of the Sagely Lord of Ninefold Mystery 
ended. The Lord Green Lad, the First Minister, in turn took it up 
and sang: 

The Nine Heavens pervade the fibers of the Primes; 

Transforming, they produce energy without bounds. 

The three numina purify the dark and then shine forth. 

The six essences follow in their cycles, then they cease to be. 

Cinnabar empyrean vanishes in empty pervasion; 

The three perfected go beyond even where’s no time. 

Look down, look up—the Great Imperial Halls 

Realize the true way of the Three Heavens now! 

Massively they wash away the bad luck of all Six Heavens. 

Properly they set up then a life without defilement. 

Reaching up all the way to the great perfected. 

They save the world completely, under the rule of Yao. 

Just about to awaken, there are the end-born children. 

Aware now that they kept a tryst with darkness. 

They eradicate the sufferings of the three bad rebirths; 

Soaring up, they take hold of the dragons’ reins. 

Like bubbling foam, they reach to Highest Clarity. 

How could there ever be obstacles to their way? 

[5a] With this the song ended. Thereupon the Highest Lord 
proceeded to discuss the True Law of the Three Heavens with his 
companions, the Sagely Lord of Ninefold Mystery, the Latter-Day 
Sage, and the Lord Green Lad, the First Minister, telling them how 
to abolish the rule of the Six Heavens forever with the use of 
precious formulas and the proper spells. For the two lords he clari¬ 
fied and explained all the celestial rules and regulations and or¬ 
dered them to go and instruct the masses of later [human] learners 
and help them to attain the state of the perfected. 




Fig. 40. Holding Court among the Gods. Source; Sancai dingwei tu. 











LIST OF CHINESE TEXTS TRANSLATED 


Text 

Section 

Baopuzi 

26,41 

Chishu yujue 

13 

Chuci 

33 

Chongyang lijiao shiwu lun 

12 

Cunshen lianqi ming 

43 

Daode jing 

1, 38 

Daojiao sandong zongyuan 

9 

Daojiao yishu 

29 

Daoti lun 

2 

Daoyin jing 

18 

Fafu kejie wen 

45 

Huahu jing 

10 

Huangdi neijing suwen 

21 

Huangting waijing jing 

24 

Huang xianshi Qutong ji 

44 

Ishimpd 

20 

Jinguan yusuo 

23 

Jinyi huandan yinzheng tu 

30 

Jiude song 

40 

Kaitian jing 

5 

Laozi daode jing xujue 

15, 22 

Liexian zhuan 

47 

Lingbao lueji 

6 

Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian 

15, 36 

Luku shousheng jing 

46 

Neiguan jing 

22 

Qingjingjing 

3 

Santian zhengfa jing 

48 


365 



366 


List of Chinese Texts Translated 


Sanyuan zhenyi jing 
Sanyuan pin 
Shenxian zhuan 
Shishuo xinyu 
Shizhou ji 
Soushenji 

Taiping jing shengjun bizhi 
Tianguan santu 
Tianyinzi 
Wufuxu 

Wushang biyao 
Wuzhen pian 
Xuanzhen jingjue 
Xuanzhu xinjing zhu 
Yinshizi jingzuo fa 
Yongcheng jixian lu 
Yuanqilun 
Yuanyou 
Yufang bijue 
Yunji qiqian 

Zengxiang liexian zhuan 

Zhuangzi 

Zuowang lun 


27 

13 

16, 39, 44 
40 
7 
39 
25 

34 
11 

19 

14 
42 

35 

28 
17 

8, 44 
22 
33 

20 
6, 9, 22 

16, 47 
4, 32, 37 
31 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Akahori Akira. 1989. “Drug Taking and Immortality.” In Taoist Meditation 
and Longevity Techniques, ed. Livia Kohn, 71-96. Ann Arbor: Uni¬ 
versity of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies Publications, 61. 

Allan, Sarah. 1991. The Shape of the Turtle: Myth, Art and Cosmos in 
Early China. Albany: State University of New York Press. 

Allinson, Robert E. 1990. Chuang-Tzu for Spiritual Transformation. Al¬ 
bany: State University of New York Press. 

Andersen, Poul. 1980. The Method of Holding the Three Ones. London and 
Malm0: Curzon Press. 

Baldrian-Hussein, Farzeen. 1984. Procedes secrets du joyau magique. Paris: 
Les Deux Oceans. 

Baldrian-Hussein, Farzeen. 1986. “Lii Tung-pin in Northern Sung Litera¬ 
ture.” Cahiers d’Extreme-Asie 2:133-70. 

-. 1986a. “Review of Understanding Reality by Thomas Cleary.” 

Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 50:335-41. 

Benn, Charles D. 1991. The Cavern Mystery Transmission: A Taoist Ordi¬ 
nation Rite of A.D. 711. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 

Bergeron, Marie-Ina. 1986. Wang Pi: Philosophie du non-avoir. Taipei, Paris, 
Hong Kong: Institut Ricci. 

Blofeld, John. 1973. The Secret and the Sublime: Taoist Mysteries and 
Magic. New York: Dutton. 

Bodde, Derk. 1942. “Some Chinese Tales of the Supernatural.” Harvard 
Journal of Asiatic Studies 6:338-57. 

Bokenkamp, Stephen. 1983. “Sources of the Ling-pao Scriptures.” In Tantric 
and Taoist Studies, ed. Michel Strickmann, 2:434-86. Brussels: 
Institut Beige des Hautes Etudes Chinoises. 


367 



368 


Bibliography 


-. 1986. “The Peach Flower Font and the Grotto Passage.” Journal of 

the American Oriental Society 106:65-79. 

-. 1989. “Death and Ascent in Ling-pao Taoism.” Taoist Resources 

1 . 2 : 1 - 20 . 

-. 1990. “Stages of Transcendence: The Bhumi Concept in Taoist Scrip¬ 
ture.” In Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha, ed. Robert E. Buswell, 119- 
46. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 

Boltz, Judith M. 1987. A Survey of Taoist Literature: Tenth to Seventeenth 
Centuries. Berkeley: University of California, China Research Mono¬ 
graph 32. 

Bynner, Witter. 1944. The Way of Life According to Lao tsu. New York: 
Perigree. 

Cahill, Suzanne. 1982. “The Image of the Goddess: Hsi Wang Mu in 
Medieval Chinese Literature.” Ph.D. diss.. University of California, 
Berkeley. 

-. 1985. “Sex and the Supernatural in Medieval China: Cantos on the 

Transcendent Who Presides Over the River.” Journal of the Ameri¬ 
can Oriental Society 105:197-220. 

-. 1986. “Reflections on a Metal Mother: Tu Kuang-t’ing’s Biography 

of Hsi-wang-mu.” Journal of Chinese Religions 13/14 :127-42. 

-. 1990. “Practice Makes Perfect: Paths to Transcendence for Women 

in Medieval China.” Taoist Resources 2.2:23-42. 

Chan, Alan. 1990. “Goddesses in Chinese Religion.” In Goddesses in Reli¬ 
gions and Modern Debate, ed. Larry W. Hurtado, 9-81. Atlanta: 
Scholars Press. 

-. 1991. Two Visions of the Way: A Study of the Wang Pi and the Ho- 

shang-kung Commentaries on the Laozi. Albany: State University of 
New York Press. 

Chan Wing-tsit. 1964. A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 

Ch’en Ku-ying. 1981. Lao-tzu: Text, Notes, and Comments. San Francisco: 
Chinese Materials Center. 

Chia, Mantak. 1986. Chi Self Massage: The Taoist Way of Rejuvenation. 
Huntington, NY: Healing Tao Books. 

-. 1987. Awaken Healing Energy through the Tao. Huntington, NY: 

Healing Tao Books. 

-. 1987a. Taoist Ways to Transform Stress into Vitality. Huntington, 

NY: Healing Tao Books. 



Bibliography 


369 


Cleary, Thomas. 1987. Understanding Reality: A Taoist Alchemical Classic 
by Chang Po-tuan. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 

Cleary, Thomas. 1991. Vitality, Energy, Spirit. A Taoist Sourcebook. Bos¬ 
ton: Shambhala. 

-. 1992. The Secret of the Golden Flower: The Classic Chinese Book of 

Life. San Francisco: HarperCollins. 

Davis, Tenney L., and Chao Yiin-ts’ung. 1939. “Chang Po-Tuan of Tien-t’ai, 
His Wu Chen P’ien, Essays on Understanding of the Truth.” Proceed¬ 
ings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 73:97-117. 

Demieville, Paul. 1987. “The Mirror of the Mind.” In Sudden and Gradual: 
Approaches to Enlightenment in Chinese Thought, ed. Peter N. Gre¬ 
gory, 13-40. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, Kuroda Institute 
Studies in East Asian Buddhism, 5. 

Despeux, Catherine. 1987. Prescriptions d’acuponcture valant mille onces 
d’or. Paris: Guy Tredaniel. 

-. 1988. La moelle du phenix rouge. Sante et longue vie dans la Chine 

du seizieme siecle. Paris: Editions Tredaniel. 

-. 1989. “Gymnastics: The Ancient Tradition.” In Taoist Meditation 

and Longevity Techniques, ed. Livia Kohn, 223-61. Ann Arbor: Uni¬ 
versity of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies Publications, 61. 

-. 1990. Immortelles de la Chine ancienne. Taoisme et alchimie femi¬ 
nine. Paris: Pardes. 

DeWoskin, Kenneth. 1977. Six Dynasties Chih-kuai and the Birth of Fic¬ 
tion. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 

-. 1983. Doctors, Diviners, and Magicians of Ancient China. New 

York: Columbia University Press. 

-. 1990. “Xian Descended: Narrating Xian among Mortals.” Taoist 

Resources 2.2:70-86. 

Dragan, Raymond. 1989. “Ways to the Way: A Review of Bibliographies on 
Taoism.” Taoist Resources 1.2:21-27. 

Eberhard, Wolfram. 1967. Guilt and Sin in Traditional China. Berkeley 
and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 

Engelhardt, Ute. 1987. Die klassische Tradition der Qi-Ubungen. Fine 
Darstellung anhand des Tang-zeitlichen Textes Fuqi jingyi lun von 
Sima Chengzhen. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner. 

-. 1989. “Qi For Life: Longevity in the Tang.” In Taoist Meditation 

and Longevity Techniques, ed. Livia Kohn, 263-94. Ann Arbor: Uni¬ 
versity of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies Publications, 61. 



370 


Bibliography 


Erkes, Eduard. 1942. “Eine P’an-ku Mythe der Hsia-Zeit.” T’oung-pao 
36:159-74. 

Fracasso, Ricardo. 1988. “Holy Mothers of Ancient China.” T’oung-pao 74:1- 
46. 

Fung Yu-lan, and Derk Bodde. 1952. A History of Chinese Philosophy. 2 
vols. Princeton, Princeton University Press. 

Giles, Lionel. 1948. A Gallery of Chinese Immortals. London: John Murray. 

Girardot, Norman. 1983. Myth and Meaning in Early Taoism. Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 

Goodrich, Anne S. 1981. Chinese Hells. St. Augustin: Monumenta Serica 
Monograph. 

Goullart, Peter. 1961. The Monastery of Jade Mountain. London: John 
Murray. 

Graham, A. C. 1960. The Book of Lieh-tzu. London: A. Murray. 

-. 1980. “How Much of Chuang-tzu Did Chuang-tzu Write?” In Stud¬ 
ies in Classical Chinese Thought. Journal of the American Academy 
of Religion, Supplement 35:459-501. 

-. 1981. Chuang-tzu: The Seven Inner Chapters, and Other Writings 

from the Book of Chuang-tzu. London: Allan and Unwin. 

-. 1982. Chuang-tzu: Textual Notes to a Partial Translation. London: 

University of London. 

-. 1990. “The Origins of the Legend of Lao Tan.” In Studies in Chi¬ 
nese Philosophy and Philosophical Literature, 111-24. Albany: State 
University of New York Press. Originally published 1981. 

Gulik, Robert van. 1963. Sexual Life in Ancient China. Leiden: E. Brill. 

Giintsch, Gertrud. 1988. Das Shen-hsien-chuan und das Erscheinungsbild 
eines Hsien. Frankfurt: Peter Lang. 

Harper, Donald. 1987. “The Sexual Arts of Ancient China As Described in a 
Manuscript of the Second Century B.C.” Harvard Journal of Asiatic 
Studies 47:459-98. 

Hawkes, David. 1959. Ch’u Tz’u: The Songs of the South. New York and 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

-. 1974. “The Quest of the Goddess.” In Studies in Chinese Literary 

Genres, ed. Cyril Birch, 42-68. New York: Columbia University Press. 

-. 1981. “Quanzhen Plays and Quanzhen Masters.” Bulletin d’Ecole 

Francaise d’Extreme-Orient 69:153-70. 



Bibliography 


371 


Hendrischke, Barbara. 1991. “The Concept of Inherited Evil in the Taiping 
jing." East Asian History 2:1-30. 

Henricks, Robert. 1989. Lao-Tzu: Te-Tao ching. New York: Ballantine. 

Holzman, Donald. 1956. “Les sept sages de la foret des bambus et la 
societe de leur temps.” T’oung-pao 44:317-46. 

-. 1976. Poetry and Politics: The Life and Works of Juan Chi (210- 

263). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Homann, Rolf. 1971. Die wichtigsten Korpergottheiten im Huang-t’ing-ching. 
Gbppingen: Alfred Kiimmerle. 

Hou Ching-lang. 1975. Monnaies d’offrande et la notion de tresorerie dans 
la religion chinoise. Paris: Memoires de ITnstitut des Hautes Etudes 
Chinoises, 1. 

Ishida, Hidemi. 1989. “Body and Mind: The Chinese Perspective.” In Tao¬ 
ist Meditation and Longevity Techniques, ed. Livia Kohn, 41-70. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies Pub¬ 
lications, 61. 

Ishihara, Akira, and Howard S. Levy. 1970. The Tao of Sex. New York: 
Harper & Row. 

Kaltenmark, Maxime. 1953. Le Lie-sien tchouan. Peking: Universite de 
Paris Publications. Reprinted 1988. 

-. 1960. “Ling-pao: Note sur un terme du Taoisme religieux.” MHanges 

publieux par ITnstitut des Hautes Etudes 2:559-88. 

-. 1969. Lao-tzu and Taoism. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 

-. 1974. “Miroirs magiques.” In Melanges de Sinologie offers a M. P. 

Demieville, 2:91-98. Brussels: Institut Beige des Hautes Etudes 
Chinoises. 

-. 1979. “The Ideology of the Tai-p’ing-ching.” In Facets of Taoism, 

ed. Holmes Welch and Anna Seidel, 19-52. New Haven: Yale Univer¬ 
sity Press. 

-. 1981. “Quelques remarques sur le ‘T’ai-shang Ling-pao wou-fou 

siu’.” Zimbun 18:1-10. 

Kandel, Barbara. 1979. Taiping jing: The Origin and Transmission of the 
‘Scripture of General Welfare’—The History of an Unofficial Text. 
Hamburg: Gesellschaft fiir Natur- und Vblkerkunde Ostasiens. 

Kaptchuk, Ted J. 1983. The Net that Has No Weaver: Understanding Chi¬ 
nese Medicine. New York: Congdon & Weed. 



372 


Bibliography 


Kirkland, Russell. 1991. “Huang Ling-Wei: A Taoist Priestess in T’ang 
China.” t/ourna/ of Chinese Religions 19:47-73. 

Knaul, Livia. 1981. Leben and Legende des Ch’en Tuan. Frankfurt: Peter 
Lang. 

Kobayashi, Masayoshi. 1992. “The Celestial Masters under the Eastern 
Jin and Liu-Song Dynasties.” Taoist Resources 3.1:17-46. 

Kohn, Livia. 1987. Seven Steps to the Tao: Sima Chengzhen’s Zuowanglun. 
St.Augustin/Nettetal: Monumenta Serica Monograph 20. 

-. 1987a. “The Teaching of T’ien-yin-tzu.” Journal of Chinese Reli¬ 
gions 15:1-28. 

-, ed. 1989. Taoist Meditation and Longevity Techniques. Ann Arbor: 

University of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies Publications, 61. 

-. 1989a. “Guarding the One: Concentrative Meditation in Taoism.” 

In Taoist Meditation and Longevity Techniques, ed. Livia Kohn, 123- 
56. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies 
Publications, 61. 

-. 1989b. “Taoist Insight Meditation: The Tang Practice of Neiguan.” 

In Taoist Meditation and Longevity Techniques, ed. Livia Kohn, 191- 
222. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies 
Publications, 61. 

-. 1989c. “The Mother of the Tao.” Taoist Resources 1.2:37-113. 

-. 1989d. “Die Emigration des Laozi. Mythologische Entwicklungen 

vom 2. bis 6. Jahrhundert.” Monumenta Serica 38:49-68. 

-. 1990. “Transcending Personality: From Ordinary to Immortal Life.” 

Taoist Resources 2.2:1-22. 

-. 1990a. “Chen Tuan in History and Legend.” Taoist Resources 2.1:8- 

31. 

-. 1991. Taoist Mystical Philosophy: The Scripture of Western Ascen¬ 
sion. Albany: State University of New York Press. 

-. 1991a. “Taoist Visions of the Body." Journal of Chinese Philosophy 

18:227-52. 

-. 1992. Early Chinese Mysticism: Philosophy and Soteriology in the 

Taoist Tradition. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 

-. 1993. “Quiet Sitting With Master Yinshi: Religion and Medicine in 

China Today.” Zen Buddhism Today 10. 

Krappe, Alexander. 1944. “Far Eastern Foxlore.” California Folklore Quar¬ 
terly 3:124-47. 



Bibliography 


373 


Kroll, Paul W. 1985. “In the Halls of the Azure Lad.” Journal of the Ameri¬ 
can Oriental Society 105:75-94. 

Kusuyama Haruki. 1992. Doha shiso to dokyo. Tokyo: Hirakawa. 

LaFargue, Michael. 1992. The Tao of the Tao-te ching. Albany: State Uni¬ 
versity of New York Press. 

Lagerwey, John. 1981. Wu-shang pi-yao: Somme tadiste du Vie siecle. Paris: 
Publications de I’Ecole Franfaise d’Extreme-Orient. 

-. 1987. Taoist Ritual in Chinese Society and History. New York: 

Macmillan. 

Lau, D. C. 1982. Chinese Classics: Tao Te Ching. Hong Kong: Hong Kong 
University Press. 

LeBlanc, Charles. 1978. Chapter Six of the Huai-nan-tzu. Hong Kong: Hong 
Kong University Press. 

-. 1985. Huai-nan-tzu: Philosophical Synthesis in Early Han Thought. 

Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. 

Legge, James. 1962. The Sacred Books of China: The Texts of Taoism. New 
York: Dover. 

Levi, Jean. 1983. “L’abstinence des cereals chez les taoistes.” Etudes 
Chinoises 1:3-47. 

-. 1989. Les fonctionnaires divins. Paris: Seuil. 

Levy, Howard S. 1956. “Yellow Turban Rebellion at the End of the Han.” 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 76:214-27. 

Lewis, Mark E. 1990. Sanctioned Violence in Early China. Albany: State 
University of New York Press. 

Li Yuanguo. 1990. “Chen Tuan’s Concepts of the Great Ultimate.” Taoist 
Resources 2.1:32-53. 

Lin Yutang. 1948. The Wisdom ofLaotse. New York: Random House. 

Ling, Peter. 1918. “The Eight Immortals of the Taoist Religion.” Journal of 
the Royal Asiatic Society, North China Branch 49:53-75. 

Liu Ts’un-yan. 1973. “The Compilation and Historical Value of the Tao- 
tsang." In Essays on the Sources of Chinese History, ed. D. Leslie, 
104-20. Canberra: Australian National University Press. 

Loewe, Michael. 1979. Ways to Paradise: the Chinese Quest for Immortal¬ 
ity. London: Allan and Unwin. 

Loon, Piet van der. 1984. Taoist Books in the Libraries of the Sung Period. 
London: Oxford Oriental Institute. 



374 


Bibliography 


Lu Gwei-djen. 1980. Celestial Lancets: A History and Rationale of Acu¬ 
puncture and Moxa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Lu Kuan-yu. 1964. The Secrets of Chinese Meditation. London: Rider. 

-. 1970. Taoist Yoga —Alchemy and Immortality. London: Rider. 

Mair, Victor H. 1983. Experimental Essays on Chuang-tzu. Honolulu: Uni¬ 
versity of Hawaii Press. 

Major, John S. 1984. “The Five Phases, Magic Squares, and Schematic 
Cosmography.” \n Explorations in Early Chinese Cosmology, ed. Henry 
Rosemont, 133-66. Chico, CA: Scholars Press, American Academy of 
Religion. 

Mansvelt-Beck, B. J. 1980. “The Date of the Taiping jing." T‘oung-pao 66: 
149-82. 

Maspero, Henri. 1924. “Legendes mythologiques dans le Chou King." Jour¬ 
nal Asiatique 20:1-101. 

-. 1981. Taoism and Chinese Religion. Trans, by Frank Kierman. 

Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. 

Mather, Richard B. 1976. A New Account of Tales of the World: The Shih- 
shuo hsin-yil. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Michaud, Paul. 1958. “The Yellow Turbans.” Monumenta Serica 17:47-127. 

Miura Kunio. 1989. “The Revival of Qi: Qigong in Contemporary China.” 
In Taoist Meditation and Longevity Techniques, ed. Livia Kohn, 329- 
58. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies 
Publications, 61. 

Needham, Joseph, et al. 1976. Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 5, no. 
3. Spagyrical Discovery and Invention: Historical Survey, from Cin¬ 
nabar Elixir to Synthetic Insulin. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

-. 1980. Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 5, no. 4. Spagyrical 

Discovery and Invention: Apparatus, Theories and Gifts. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

-. 1983. Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 5, no. 5. Spagyrical 

Discovery and Invention: Physiological Alchemy. Cambridge: Cam¬ 
bridge University Press. 

Ngo Van Xuyet. 1976. Divination, Magie et Politique dans la Chine ancienne. 
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 

Ofuchi Ninji. 1974. “On Ku Ling-pao ching.” Acta Asiatica 27:33-56. 



Bibliography 


375 


-. 1979. “The Formation of the Taoist Canon.” In Facets of Taoism, 

ed. Holmes Welch and Anna Seidel, 253-68. New Haven; Yale Uni¬ 
versity Press. 

-. 1979a. Tonko dokei. Zuroku hen (Taoist Scriptures from Dunhuang). 

Tokyo: Kokubu shoten. 

Pas, Julian F. 1988. A Select Bibliography on Taoism. Stony Brook, NY: 
Institute for the Advanced Study of World Religions. 

Petersen, Jens O. 1989. “The Early Traditions Relating to the Han-dynasty 
Transmission of the Taiping jing.” Part 1. Acta Orientalia 50:133- 
71. 

-. 1990. “The Early Traditions Relating to the Han-dynasty Trans¬ 
mission of the Taiping jing.” Part 2. Acta Orientalia 51:163-216. 

-. 1990a. “The Anti-Messianism of the Taiping jing.” Journal of the 

Seminar for Buddhist Studies 3:1-36. 

Porkert, Manfred. 1974. The Theoretical Foundations of Chinese Medicine. 
Cambridge: MIT Press. 

-. 1983. The Essentials of Chinese Diagnosis. Zurich: Acta Medicinae 

Sinensis. 

Pregadio, Fabrizio. 1991. “The Book of the Nine Elixirs and Its Tradition.” 
In Chugoku kodai kagakushi ron, ed. Yamada Keiji, 539-636. Kyoto: 
Jimbun kagaku kenkyujo. 

Reiter, Florian C. 1985. “Ch’ung-yang Sets Forth His Teachings in Fifteen 
Discourses.” Monumenta Serica 36:33-54. 

-., ed. 1990. Leben und Wirken Lao-Tzu’s in Schrift und Bild. Lao- 

chiin pa-shih-i-hua t’u-shuo. Wurzburg: Konigshausen & Neumann. 

Robinet, Isabelle. 1977. Les commentaires du Tao to king jusqu’au Vile 
siecle. Paris: Memoirs de ITnstitut des Hautes Etudes Chinoises, 5. 

-. 1979. Meditation taoiste. Paris: Dervy Livres. 

-. 1979a. “Metamorphosis and Deliverance of the Corpse in Taoism.” 

History of Religions 19:37-70. 

-. 1984. La revNation du Shangqing dans Thistoire du Taoisme. 2 

Vols. Paris: Publications de I’Ecole Fran^aise d’Extreme-Orient. 

-. 1986. “The Taoist Immortal: Jester of Light and Shadow, Heaven 

and Earth.” Journal of Chinese Religions 13/14: 87-106. 

-. 1989. “Original Contributions of Neidan to Taoism and Chinese 

Thought.” In Taoist Meditation and Longevity Techniques, ed. Livia 
Kohn, 295-328. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Center for Chi¬ 
nese Studies Publications, 61. 



376 


Bibliography 


-. 1989a. “Visualization and Ecstatic Flight in Shangqing Taoism.” In 

Taoist Meditation and Longevity Techniques, ed. Livia Kohn, 157- 
90. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies 
Publications, 61. 

-. 1991. Histoire du Tadisme: des origins au XlVe siecle. Paris: Edi¬ 
tions Cerf. 

Robinson, Richard. 1967. Early Madhyamika in India and China. Madi¬ 
son: University of Wisconsin Press. 

Roth, Harold D. 1991. “Psychology and Self-Cultivation in Early Taoistic 
Thought.” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 51:599-650. 

-. 1991a. “Who Compiled the Chuang-tzu?” In Chinese Texts and 

Philosophical Contexts, ed. Henry Rosemont, Jr. 79-128. La Salle, 
IL: Open Court Press. 

-. 1992. The Textual History of the Huai-nan Tzu. Ann Arbor: Associa¬ 
tion for Asian Studies Monographs. 

Rousselle, Erwin. 1933. “Zum Nei-ching-t’u.” Sinica 8:207-16. 

Russell, Terence. 1990. “Chen Tuan at Mount Huangbo.”Astatisc/ie StudienI 
Etudes Asiatiques 44:107—40. 

-. 1990a. “Chen Tuan’s Veneration of the Dharma: A Study in 

Hagiographic Modification.” Taoist Resources 2.1:54-72. 

Sailey, Jay. 1978. The Master Who Embraces Simplicity: A Study of the 
Philosophy of Ko Hung (A.D. 283-343). San Francisco: Chinese Ma¬ 
terials Center. 

Sakade Yoshinobu. 1989. “Longevity Techniques in Japan: Ancient Sources 
and Contemporary Studies.” In Taoist Meditation and Longevity Tech¬ 
niques, ed. Livia Kohn, 1-40. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 
Center for Chinese Studies Publications, 61. 

Saso, Michael. 1972. Taoism and the Rite of Cosmic Renewal. Seattle: 
Washington University Press. 

Schafer, Edward H. 1973. The Divine Woman. Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press. 

-. 1977. Pacing the Void. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of 

California Press. 

-. 1978. “The Jade Woman of Greatest Mystery.” History of Religions 

17:387-98. 

-. 1978a. “The Capeline Cantos: Verses on the Divine Loves of Taoist 

Priestesses.” Asiah'sc/ie Studien !Etudes Asiatiques 32:5-65. 



Bibliography 


377 


-. 1981. “Wu Yiin’s ‘Cantos on Pacing the Void’.” Harvard Journal of 

Asiatic Studies 41:377-415. 

-. 1985. Mirages on the Sea of Time. The Taoist Poetry ofTs’ao Tang. 

Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Schipper, Kristofer. 1965. L’Empereur Wou des Han dans la legende taoiste. 
Paris: Publications de I’Ecole Franfaise d’Extreme-Orient, 58. 

-. 1975. Le Fen-teng: Rituel taoiste. Paris: Publications de I’Ecole 

Franfaise d’Extreme-Orient. 

-. 1975a. Concordance du Houang-t’ing king. Paris: Publications de 

I’Ecole Franfaise d’Extreme-Orient. 

-. 1978. “The Taoist Body.” History o/'i?eZigio«s 17:355-87. 

-. 1982. Le corps taoiste: Corps physique—corps social. Paris: Fayard. 

-. 1985. “Vernacular and Classical Ritual in Taoism.” Journai of Asian 

Studies 65:21-51. 

-. 1985a. “Taoist Ritual and Local Cults of the T’ang Dynasty.” In 

Tantric and Taoist Studies, ed. Michel Strickmann, 3:812-34. Brus¬ 
sels: Institut Beige des Hautes Etudes Chinoises. 

Schmidt, H. H. 1985. “Die hundertachtzig Vorschriften von Lao-chiin.” In 
Religion und Philosophic in Ostasien. Festschrift fur Hans Steininger, 
ed. G. Naundorf, K H. Pohl, H. H. Schmidt, 149-59. Wurzburg: 
Kdnigshausen und Neumann. 

Schneider, Laurence. 1980. A Madman of Ch’u: The Chinese Myth of Loy¬ 
alty and Dissent. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California 
Press. 

Seidel, Anna. 1969. La divinisation de Lao tseu dans le Taoisme des Han. 
Paris: Ecole Franfaise d’Extreme Orient. 

-. 1969a. “The Image of the Perfect Ruler in Early Taoist Messianism.” 

History of Religions 9:216-47. 

-. 1978. “Buying One’s Way to Heaven: The Celestial Treasury in 

Chinese Religions.” History of Religions 17:419-32. 

-. 1983. “Imperial Treasures and Taoist Sacraments: Taoist Roots in 

the Apocrypha.” In Tantric and Taoist Studies, ed. Michel Strickmann, 
2:291-371. Brussels: Institut Beige des Hautes Etudes Chinoises. 

-. 1984. “Le sutra merveilleux du Ling-pao supreme, traitant de Lao 

tseu qui convertit les barbares.” In Contributions aux etudes du 
Touen-houang, ed. Michel Soymie 1984:305-52. Geneva: Ecole 
Franfaise d’Extreme-Orient. 



378 


Bibliography 


-. 1990. Taoismus: Die inoffizielle Hochreligion Chinas. Tokyo: 

Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Natur- und Volkerkunde Ostasiens. 

Sivin, Nathan. 1968. Chinese Alchemy: Preliminary Studies. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press. 

Smith, Thomas E. 1990. “The Record of the Ten Continents.” Taoist Re¬ 
sources 2.2:87-119. 

-. 1992. “Ritual and the Shaping of Narrative: The Legend of the Han 

Emperor Wu.” Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 

Soymie, Michel. 1968. “Bibliographie du Tao'isme: etudes dans les langues 
occidentales.” Dokyo kenkyu 3:246-317. 

-. 1969. “Bibliographie du Taoisme: etudes dans les langues orientales.” 

Dokyo kenkyu 4:225-87. 

Spiro, Audrey. 1990. “How Light And Airy: Upward Mobility in the Realm 
of Immortals.” Taoist Resources 2.2:43-69. 

Stein, Rolf A. 1990. The World in Miniature: Container Gardens and Dwell¬ 
ings in Far Eastern Religious Thought. Trans, by Phyllis Brooks. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 

Strickmann, Michel. 1978. “The Mao-shan Revelations: Taoism and the 
Aristocracy.” T’oung-pao 63:1-63. 

-. 1979. “On the Alchemy of T’ao Hung-ching.” In Facets of Taoism, 

ed. Holmes Welch and Anna Seidel, 123-92. New Haven: Yale Uni¬ 
versity Press. 

-. 1981. Le Tao'isme du Mao chan: chronique d’une revelation. Paris: 

College du France, Institut des Hautes Etudes Chinoises. 

Takehiro, Teri. 1990. “The Twelve Sleep Exercises of Mount Hua.” Taoist 
Resources 2.1:73-94. 

Thompson, Laurence. 1985. Chinese Religion in Western Languages: A Com¬ 
prehensive and Classified Bibliography. . . through 1980. Phoenix: 
University of Arizona Press. 

-. 1985a. “Taoism: Classic and Canon.” In The Holy Book in Com¬ 
parative Perspective, ed. Frederick M. Denny and Rodney F. Taylor, 
204-23. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press. 

-. 1989. “On the Prehistory of Hell in China.” Journal of Chinese 

Religions 17:27-41. 

Tsui, Bartholomew P. M. 1991. Taoist Tradition and Change: The Story of 
the Complete Perfection Sect in Hong Kong. Hong Kong: Christian 
Study Centre on Chinese Religion and Culture. 



Bibliography 


379 


Unschuld, Paul. 1985. Medicine in China: A History of Ideas. Berkeley and 
Los Angeles: University of California Press. 

Veith, Ilza. 1963. “The Supernatural in the Far Eastern Concepts of Men¬ 
tal Diseases.” Bulletin of the History of Medicine 37:145. 

-. 1972. The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine. Berkeley 

and Los Angeles: University of California Press. Originally pub¬ 
lished 1949. 

Verellen, Franciscus. 1989. Du Guangting (850-933) — taoiste de cour a la 
fin de la Chine medievale. Paris: College du France, Memoires de 
L’Institut des Hautes Etudes Chinoises, 30. 

Wagner, Rudolf. 1973. “Lebensstil und Drogen im chinesischen Mittelalter.” 
T’oung-pao 59:79-178. 

-. 1980. “Interlocking Parallel Style: Laozi and Wang Bi.” Asiatische 

Studien /Etudes Asiatiques 34:18-53. 

-. 1986. “Wang Bi: ‘The Structure of the Laozi’s Pointers’.” T’oung- 

pao 72:92-129. 

-. 1989. “The Wang Bi Recension of the Laozi." Early China 14:27- 

54. 

Waley, Arthur. 1934. The Way and Its Power. London: Allen and Unwin. 

-. 1955. The Nine Songs: A Study of Shamanism in Ancient China. 

London: Allen and Unwin. 

Ware, James R. 1966. Alchemy, Medicine and Religion in the China of a.d. 
320: The Nei P’ien of Ko Hung. Cambridge: MIT Press. 

Watson, Burton. 1968. The Complete Works of Chuang-tzu. New York: Co¬ 
lumbia University Press. 

Welch, Holmes, and Anna Seidel, eds. 1979. Facets of Taoism. New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 

Wile, Douglas. 1992. Art of the Bedchamber: The Chinese Sexual Yoga 
Classics Including Women’s Solo Meditation Texts. Albany: State 
University of New York Press. 

Wilhelm, Richard. 1962. The Secret of the Golden Flower. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace and World. Originally published Zurich, 1929 . 

Wong, Eva. 1992. Cultivating Stillness: A Taoist Manual for Transforming 
Body and Mind. Boston: Shambhala. 

Yamada Keiji. 1979. “The Formation of the Huang-ti nei-ching.” Acta 
Asiatica 36:67-89. 



380 


Bibliography 


Yamada, Toshiaki. 1989. “Longevity Techniques and the Compilation of the 
Lingbao wufuxu.” In Taoist Meditation and Longevity Techniques, 
ed. Livia Kohn, 91-122. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Center 
for Chinese Studies Publications, 61. 

Yang, F. S. 1958. “A Study of the Origin of the Legend of the Eight Immor¬ 
tals.” Oriens Extremus 5:1-20. 

Yao Tao-chung. 1980. “Ch’iian-chen: A New Taoist Sect in North China 
During the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries.” Ph.D. Diss., Univer¬ 
sity of Arizona, Phoenix. 

Yetts, Percifal. 1916. “The Eight Immortals.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society 1916:773-807. 

-. 1922. “More Notes on the Eight Immortals.” Journal of the Royal 

Asiatic Society 1922:397^26. 

Yoshioka Yoshitoyo. 1979. “Taoist Monastic Life.” In Facets of Taoism, ed. 
Holmes Welch and Anna Seidel, 220-52. New Haven: Yale Univer¬ 
sity Press. 

Yii "Wng-shih. 1964. “Life and Immortality in the Mind of Han-China.” 
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 25:80-122. 

Ziircher, Erik. 1959. The Buddhist Conquest of China. 2 Vols. Leiden: E. 
Brill. 

-. 1980. “Buddhist Influence on Early Taoism.” T’oung-pao 66:84- 

147. 



INDEX 


alchemy, 117, 132, 229, 232, 303, 305- 
13; see Cinnabar, inner alchemy 
Ancestor Continent, 49-50 
ancestors, 29, 109, 174, 197, 260, 264, 
265, 267, 334 
An Lushan, 6 

antiquity, 39, 40, 249; rulers of, 40 
apparent existence, 225-26 
ascension, as summons, 132, 326-27; by 
alchemy, 296, 305-13; by inner al¬ 
chemy, 313-19; by spiritual means, 
118, 130, 319-25; confusion at, 304, 
327, 330, 332, 352; forms of, 303-04; 
in reports, 325-32; prayer for, 112; tim¬ 
ing of, 279; see deliverance from the 
corpse, liberation, transformation 
Baishi xiansheng, see Master Whitestone 
Bai Yuchan, 230 
balance, 83-84, 98-99 
bamboo, 120,124,125, 178, 304, 315, 330 
Baopuzi, 43, 48, 192, 197-98, 304, 306; 

trl. 198-204, 306-13 
Baosheng jing, 211 
barbarians, 64, 71, 72, 75-76, 150 
Binding Coil, 269 
Blaze Continent, 51-52 
Blessed Melter, 41, 256 
bodhisattva, 175 

body, and mind, 86, 87, 90, 92, 95, 221, 
225, 238, 240, 249, 304, 321; as world, 
162, 168-74, 217, 222; creation of, 20, 
235, 243, 344; decay of, 88, 96, 108, 
123, 305-07; energies in, 133-34, 149, 
180, 271, 307, 324; eternal, 92; exer¬ 
cises of, 95, 142-44, 145-47; general 
understanding of, 161-63; gods in, 113, 


181-88, 204-14, 222; in medicine, 133- 
34, 163-68; lightness of, 62, 83, 180, 
323-24; observation/dissolution of, 27, 
215, 218, 226, 228, 240, 254, 274; pos¬ 
ture, 89-90; signs of, 127; stages of, 
321, 323-24; world in, 174-80, 182; see 
Tao, practices 

Book of Changes, see Yijing 
Brahma Heavens, 69, 70, 333, 338, 340 
breath, see energy 

breath pipe, 187, see twelve-storied tower 
breathing, 133, 135-41, 144, 145, 147- 
48, 161, 178, 182-83, 187, 282, 315 
Buddha, 76, 77, 78, 176 
Buddhism, and barbarians, 71, 75; and 
inner alchemy, 75-80, 313; and 
Numinous Treasure, 5, 34, 43, 343; 
canon of, 65; cosmology of, 48-90, 175- 
80, 343; growth of, 6; insight in, 191- 
92, 221-22; Mahayana, 35, 97, 193, 
215, 223; monachism of, 86; origins of, 
76; precepts of, 71, 75-76, 97, 148; see 
Madhyamika 
butterfly, 242 

Cai Jing, 355, 357-58 
calamus, 52, 152 
Cantong qi, 313 
Cao Cao, 297, 299 
cauldron, 230, 232-33, 314 
Cave Continent, 54, 78 
Celestial Emperor, 204, 207, 210 
Celestial Masters, 4, 5, 6, 7, 66-68, 109, 
153, 194, 335, 358 

Celestial Treasury, 334-35, 343, 345; of¬ 
ficers in, 346-48, 349-50 


381 



382 


Index 


Central Asia, 45, 73, 76, 150, 249 
chaos, 17, 20, 23-24, 35, 39, 57, 173, 183, 
205, 216, 232, 264 
Chen Tuan, 251,271-76 
Chifeng sui, 275 

Chijingzi, see Master of Red Essence 
Chishu yujue, 96, 97; trl. 98-100 
Chisongzi, see Master Redpine 
Chuci, 250, 251, 267 
Chonghezi, see Master of Pure Harmony 
Chongyang lijiao shiwu lun, 65, 86, trl. 
86-92 

Chongyang zhenren jinguan yusuo jue, 
see Jinguan yusuo 

cinnabar elixir, 91, 117, 132, 229-30, 
232-35, 273, 304, 335, 357; gold and, 
306-14, 319; nine elixirs, 309-10, 312- 
13; recipe for, 309 

Cinnabar Field, 144, 182, 183-84, 185- 
86, 192, 199, 204, 209-12, 213, 229, 
304, 321, 329 
Cinnabar Hill, 254 

Cinnabar Scriptures, 200, 296, 306, 308, 
310-12 

Cinnabar Sovereign, 204, 207, 210 
Cold Food-Powder, 299 
Community, 89, 95, 100-06; obligations 
to, 130; of monastery, 328; rules, 103, 
105; upset at ascension, 124, 304, 327, 
330, 332; see precepts 
Complete Perfection, 6, 7, 24, 65, 86, 87, 
120, 121, 163, 174 

concentration, 191-92; and physical prac¬ 
tices, 134, 251; and visualization, 173, 
182, 195; attainment of, 106-07, 236, 
271, 283, 323; difficulties with, 208- 
09; practice of, 188, 221, 224, 225, 235, 
257; stages of, 321-22; see guarding 
the one; tranquility 
Confucianism, 86, 313 
Confucian virtues, 14, 30, 286 
Confucius, 6, 46-47, 71, 79, 152, 176, 
244, 245-46, 313 

creation, 18, 20, 22, 33-35, 66, 173, 192, 
256, 360; from body, 169; in Numinous 
Treasure, 44; of humanity, 37; stages 
of, 35-39, 69, 171, 230; through scrip¬ 
tures, 36-37, 39-42 
Crimson Palace, see heart 
Cuigu, 272-73 


Culture, development of, 40-42 
Cunshen lianqi ming, 305, 320; trl. 320- 
25 

Daode jing, and philosophical Taoism, 4, 
29; commentaries to, 19, 96, 116-17, 
173, 223; history of, 12, 13; on body, 
240; on creation, 68-69; on desires, 
236; on sage, 285-90; on Tao, 2, 13- 
18, 95; transmission of, 73, 119; ven¬ 
eration of, 13, 118; trl. 13-18, 285-90 
Daojiao sandong zongyuan, 64, 65; trl. 
66-71 

Daojiao yishu, 22, 223-24; trl. 224-28 

Daoshu, 142 

Daoti lun, 12; trl. 19-24 

Daoyin jing, 135, 141-42; trl. 142-48 

Daoyin tu, 141 

Dark Towers, 183, 185 

Dark Warrior, 255 

Dayou Zhang, 150 

death, and life, 175, 246; as transforma¬ 
tion, 85, 244-45, 305, 331-32; eventu¬ 
ality of, 89; happiness in, 244-45; 
indications of, 167; knowledge of, 117, 
131; premature, 84, 123, 311; pretense 
of, 124, 130 

deliverance from the corpse, 120, 124, 
217, 304, 331-32, 355 
demons, and sickness, 95-96, 300; fear 
of, 131; gate of, 259, 262; heavens of, 
265; invocations against, 110,112, 115; 
master of, 120, 125, 310; power over, 
76, 121, 125-26, 151, 184, 196, 202, 
210, 267, 280, 295; snake, 330; Scrip¬ 
ture of, 75; tortoise, 125-26 
Department of Destiny, see Ruler of Fates 
desires, and emotions, 81, 112, 131, 236, 
322; and mind, 25, 27, 130, 286; and 
passions, 83, 98, 101, 130, 175, 324; 
fight against, 238-41; for world, 92, 
102; freedom from, 13, 236, 242-43, 
289; greed, 102, 130 

destiny, 91, 96, 239, 243, 245, 320, 344; 

see inner nature 
diet, see food 
Dingguan jing, 320 
Dingzhi jing, 238 
Discipline, 95-96, 100-06 
disease, and body, 95-96, 240; cures for. 



Index 


383 


96, 121, 135-36, 142, 144-45, 147-48, 
152, 180, 195, 323; help during, 89, 
280; power over, 125, 295, 326, 328, 
352; pretense of, 124, 130; prevention 
of, 151, 188; symptoms of, 142, 157- 
58, 196, 352; see medicine 
divination, 4 

Divine Law, 98-99, 101, 108, 11, 112 
Dongfang Shuo, 49, 355 
Dongwang gong, see Lord King of the 
East 

Dragon Boat Festival, 251 
dragon, and rainmaking, 72, 126, 291, 
295, 333; and tiger, 74, 174, 202, 232, 
271, 273, 316, 319, 326; as guards, 72, 
360; as ornaments, 336, 340; dancing 
of, 358; for ascension, 112, 217, 303, 
308, 352; green, 91, 125, 174, 326; in 
immortals’ entourage, 75, 254, 311, 
326, 342, 357, 361; in inner alchemy, 
232, 234; kings, 76; protection against, 
76, 202; with toothache, 352; year of, 
348, 349 

dream, 125, 129, 241, 242, 246, 274-76, 
282 

Du Guagting, 34, 56, 116, 305, 325 
Dunhuang, 3, 64, 71, 96, 116, 117 
dwellings, 82, 83-84, 86, 88-89 

ecstatic excursions, 5, 32, 173-74, 191, 
205, 211, 245-46, 249-51, 309, 317, 
334, 342, 360; as encounter, 268-71; 
in sleep, 272-76; instructions for, 257- 
67; songs of, 251-57 
Eight Immortals, 121, 281 
eight worthies, 292, 294-96 
elixir, see cinnabar 

embryo, 171, 183, 209, 212, 229-30, 271, 
304, 318 

emotions, see desires 
emptiness, 16, 23, 27, 33, 81, 92, 118, 
178, 196, 218, 219, 225, 226-27, 236, 
262, 269, 274, 316, 361 
energy, and blood, 86-87, 133, 144; and 
life, 37, 82, 164-66, 198, 209, 230, 252; 
and spirit, 86, 88, 145, 321; centers, 
184, 185-86, channels, 112, 115, 134, 
141, 161, 177, 271; cultivation of, 81, 
118, 145, 187, 304, 321, 324; forms of, 
91, 133-34, 161, 163, 180, 192, 194, 


229; god of, 212; living on, 83, 149, 
185, 253, 321; observation of, 221, 224; 
ocean of, 320-21; of emptiness, 81; of 
yin, 52; pathogenic, 133, 144, 208, 211; 
primordial, 57, 115, 152, 188, 192, 208, 
216, 234, 320; regulation of, 88, 98-99, 
162; see body, breathing, yin and yang 
Erya, 59 

essence, and blood, 82; and creation, 37, 
72, 169, 171, 180, 352; and spirit, 152, 
183, 192, 194, 209, 229, 242; as se¬ 
men, 134, 153-54; god of, 212; in cos¬ 
mology, 163; in kidneys, 172, 183-84; 
in stars, 113, 260-63; of sun and moon, 
268-70; of tests, 87; reversion of, 187- 
88; Tallisman of, 187-88; see sexual 
practices, spirit, transformations 
examinations, 95, 96, 119-20, 124-25, 
130-31 

Fafu kejie wen, 335; trl. 336-42 
faith, 101, 122 

fangshi, see magico-technicians 
fasting, see food 
fate, see destiny 
Fei Changfang, 97, 120, 121-26 
Fengdu, 259, 263, 265-67, 343, 345-46, 
350 

Fire Forest, 52 

First Emperor, 49, 50, 353, 355 
five agents, 75, 82,161-62, 171, 172, 196, 
221, 318; in cosmology, 163 
five colors, 164, 167, 187, 195-96, 254, 
313, 336, 338, 340-41 
five directions, 149, 169, 183, 193, 196, 
214, 250, 255, 258, 273, 313, 338, 345; 
gods of, 112-15; in cosmology, 163 
Five Emperors, 42, 106, 294 
five energies, 40, 91, 149, 164-65, 174 
five flavors, 40, 164, 166, 186 
five grains, 40 
five monasteries, 178 
five orbs, 39, 148, 161-63, 163-68, 172, 
174, 196, 211, 214, 229, 270, 273; defi¬ 
nition of, 161, 165-66 
five sprouts, 149, 193 
Floating Continent, 53, 78 
Flower Maiden, 305, 325, 330-32 
Fluteplayer, 352-53 
Flying Wind, 155 



384 


Index 


Food, avoidance of grain, 82-83, 305-06; 
control of, 82-83, 134; greed for, 102; 
harm to body, 87, 136, 166-67, 273; 
immortality drugs, 148-53; necessity 
of, 236 

Former Heaven, 232, 234 
four karmic fruits, 178 
four rivers, 39, 75, 104, 169 
four seasons, 133, 162, 163, 165-66, 196, 
199, 212, 214, 243, 253, 283 
Four Supplements, 67-68 
fox lady, 154, 155, 238 
Fucha, 47 
Fuqi jingyi lun, 19 
FusangTree, 77 
FuYue,252 
Fu Xi, 40 

Gan Bao, 290 

gardener, 243-44 

Gate of Life, 183, 212 

Gebei Lake, 126 

Ge Chaofu, 5, 43, 48, 97, 198 

Ge-family tradition, 198 

Ge Hong, 43, 121, 197-98, 290, 306 

Ge Xuan, 43, 47, 306 

GeYue, 290-91 

ginger, 151, 152 

gods, and creation, 33-34, 169-70; as in¬ 
fants, 182, 186, 188; assembly of, 73- 
75; in body, 162, 171, 181-88, 196-97, 
203, 204-14, 222, 257; in heaven, 255- 
56, 327, 337-42, 360-62; instructions 
by, 116-18, 344; of Dipper, 259-64; of¬ 
ferings to, 110, 302, 308, 309, 311; of 
mountains and rivers, 39; of yin and 
Yang, 56; pictures of, 38, 58, 60, 114, 
255, 261, 339, 363; prayers to, 108, 110; 
see Great One, Heavenly Venerable, 
Laozi, Primal Lord, Queen Mother of 
the West, Three Ones, Venerable Lord 
gold, 306, 307, 309, 311, 316-17, 358 
golden fluid, 117, 229, 358 
Gou Mang, 255 

Gourd Master, 120, 121-24, 334 
Grand Network, 70, 337 
Great Clarity, 35, 40, 66-67, 73, 206, 251, 
257, 308, 312, 338 

great man, 30, 282, 284-85, 299-301 
Great One, 61, 69, 144, 152, 171, 192, 


216, 224, 246, 253, 284, 287, 311, 316- 
17, 338; Goddess of, 74, 96, 116, 117- 
18; see Three Ones, True One 
Great Peace, 4, 5, 193-94, 195, 285; 

Supplement of, 67 
Great Storehouse, 183 
Great Tenuity, 204, 205, 254 
grotto, as microcosm, 46, 122, 280, 328- 
29, 355; heavens, 230, 274, 292, 342; 
in body, 176, 178 

Grotto Chamber, 182, 183, 199, 205-06, 
209 

Guang Miaoyin, 48 

guarding the One, 118, 191, 195-97, 200- 
04, 208, 215-19 
Gu Chun, 355 
Guiji, 50, 355 

gymnastics, 134, 141-48, 182, 312 

Hai Anjun, 48 

Hairy Lady, 353, 355 

Hall of Light, 182, 183, 187, 199, 201, 

209, 268-70 

Han dynasty, 3, 4, 5, 49, 56, 116, 121, 
135, 141, 149, 153, 161, 162, 164, 192, 
193, 249, 290, 306, 312, 335, 336, 343, 
351, 355 

Han Emperor Wen, 116, 118, 355 
Han Wudi neizhuan, 49 
Han Zhong, 252 

heart, 39, 165, 185, 188, 201, 204, 209, 

210, 213, 229; goodness of, 98-99, 108, 
122, 131; see five orbs 

heaven and earth, and Great Peace, 113; 
and Laozi, 75, 181; and spirit, 72, 194; 
and yin/yang, 39, 80, 85, 164, 239, 
245; benevolence of, 14, 243, 246; de¬ 
struction of, 44; greatness of, 17, 110, 
119, 127, 164, 194, 252, 284, 314; lon¬ 
gevity of, 151, 308; origin of, 13, 25, 
33, 35-37, 68, 169, 198, 216, 232; 
power over, 91, 172, 300, 301, 324; 
simplicity of, 81, 239; travels through, 
202, 249; trigrams of, 230-31; see ec¬ 
static excursions, heavens, Kalpa, yin 
and yang 

Heavenly Pass, 213-14, 257-59, 260, 
262, 264, 265 

Heavenly Venerable of Numinous Trea¬ 
sure, 343, 344-50 




Index 


385 


Heavenly Venerable of Primordial Begin¬ 
ning, 34, 44-45, 56, 70, 74, 105, 337; 
names of 70-71 

Heavenly Venerables, 44, 70, 110, 337- 
38 

heavens, administration of, 102,104,106, 
185, 303, 333, 343-50; feasting in, 327, 
334, 358-63; in body, 178, 179; pal¬ 
aces of, 50, 55, 57, 59, 70, 254, 265, 
324, 327, 334, 340-41, 360; structure 
of, 66, 68, 69-70, 337^2 
hells, 334, 343-50; see Fengdu 
Hemp Lady, 355-58 
herbs, see immortality drugs 
Heshang gong, see Master on the River 
Hetu, 43 

Highest Clarity, 5, 6, 19, 34, 43, 49, 61, 
65, 66-67, 80, 163, 181, 192, 193, 198, 
204, 205, 208, 210, 215, 250, 257, 267, 
306, 338, 343, 360, 362 
Highest Lord, see Venerable Lord 
Highest Scripture of Immaculate Numen, 
see Suling jing 
Hua (mountain), 271-73, 353 
Huahu Jing, 64, 71; trl. 72-80 
Huainanzi, 29 

Huang bo (Chan School), 272 
Huangdi, see Yellow Emperor 
Huangdi neijing suwen, 162, 163; trl. 
163-68 

Huang Dongyuan, 328-29 
Huanglao jun, 3 

Huang Lingwei, see Flower Maiden 
Huangting neijing jing, 181 
Huangting waijing jing, 163, 181; trl. 
181-88 

Huang xianshi Qutong ji, 305, 325; trl. 
328-30 

gong, see Gourd Master 
Huizi, 242 

immortality, beasts, 52-54, 70; descrip¬ 
tion, 81; drugs, 88, 117, 122, 148-53, 
202, 299-300, 306, 308; plants, 34, 49- 
50, 52-54, 328, 341, 360; stages to, 80, 
82, 85, 178, 235, 305, 321-24; timing 
of, 132, 179, 258, 270, 273 
immortals, banished, 122; dress of, 59, 
259-64, 269-70, 327, 333, 335^2, 357; 
dwellings of, 55, 61, 69, 70, 122, 340, 


341, 360; entourage of, 59, 174, 205, 
254, 258, 305, 326, 342, 357, 360; hier¬ 
archy of, 69-70, 78, 122, 333, 337-42, 
343, 347; in world, 351-58; kinds of, 
85-86, 122; looks of, 127; music of, 75, 
156, 185, 352-53, 355, 360-62; person¬ 
ality of, 222, 238, 241, 279-81, 283, 
329; popular image of, 121, 281; regis¬ 
ters of, 258-64; Scripture, 199, 200, 
352; utensils of, 336 
incantation, see prayer 
India, 78, 180 

inner alchemy, 6, 25, 91, 117, 154, 163, 
222, 229-30, 271, 272, 313-14 
inner nature, 19, 88, 90, 91, 217, 235, 
239, 242, 313 
Ishimpd, 135, 154 

insight, 191, 221-22, 236-41, 320, 324; 
kinds of, 223, 224-29, 235 

Jade Capital, 69, 70, 217 

Jade Clarity, 66-67,69, 92, 216, 266, 337, 

360 

Jade Emperor, 70, 71, 257-59, 264, 324, 

361 

Jade Maiden of Greatest Mystery, 269-71 
Jade Maiden of Mystery and Wonder, 72, 
116 

Jade Pond, 184, 186 

Jiang Weiqiao, 135-36 

Jiao Shaoxuan, 215 

Jinguan yusuo, 163, 174; trl. 175-80 

Jin Li, 272-73, 276 

Jinque dijun sanyuan zhenyin jing, see 
Sanyuan zhenyi jing 
Jinyi huandan yinzheng tu, 222, 229, 
316, 318; tr/. 230-35 
Jiude song, 299; trl. 300-01 

Kaitian jing, 34 35; trl. 35-43 
kalpa, 36, 37, 38, 44, 110, 113, 344, 346, 
361; names of, 44; revolution, 48, 78, 
361 

karma and retribution, 78, 96, 99, 110, 
175-76, 230-31, 234, 235, 236, 239- 
41, 243, 260, 261, 335, 344-50 
karmic stages, 178 
Khotan, 73 

kidneys, 165, 183, 185, 201, 229; see five 
orbs / 



386 


Index 


Killing, 75, 101-04 
King Helii of Wu, 46-47 
King Mu of Zhou, 55, 77, 294 
King Suddhodana, 78 
King You of, Zhou, 78 
Ku (emperor), 42, 45 
Kunlun, 49, 54-55, 56, 57, 59, 79, 200, 
274,311,317 
Kunwu (sword), 53 

Lad Qu, 305, 325, 328-30 
Lady of Great Mystery, 291-92 
language, bad, 101; contentious, 99, 104; 
false, 102-03; flowery, 98, of immor¬ 
tals, 127; see Tao and language 
Lao (mountain), 117 
Laojun bashiyi hua tushuo, 21, 38, 77 
Laozi, and Confucius, 79, 245-46; as ar¬ 
chivist, 73; as author of Daode jing, 
13, 23, 81, 82, 118, 119, 173, 216; as 
god of the Tao, 3-4, 34, 35, 63, 181- 
83; as imperial ancestor, 6; as seeker, 
116-17; birth of, 23, 72, 181; emigra¬ 
tion of, 73-74, 77; names of, 23, 72- 
73, 181; prophesy of, 79-80; 

transformations of, 23, 36, 63, 71-80, 
182; see Venerable Lord 
Laozi bianhua jing, 71 
Laozi daode jing xujue, 116, 162, 169; 

trl. 118-19, 173-74 
Laozi xisheng huahu jing xushuo, 71 
Latter-day Sage, 79, 360, 362 
lead and mercury, 229, 232-33, 271, 304, 
308, 315-17 
Lezichang, 149, 152 
Li (mountain), 117 

liberation, 80, 82, 85-86, 92, 100, 129, 
180, 232, 235, 241, 323-24 
Liexian zhuan, 290, 335, 351; trl. 351- 
55 

Liezi, 29 

Life Continent, 53 

Lingbao, see Numinous Treasure 

Lingbao jing, 209 

Lingbao lueji, 34, 43; trl. 44-48 

Lingbao wufuxu, see Wufuxu 

Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian, 116, 272; 

trl. 117-18, 272-76 
Liu An, 292-96 
Liu Ling, 281, 299-301 


Liu Xiang, 351 
liver, 166; see five orbs 
Long Continent, 52 

long life, 2, 50, 53, 80, 95, 133-35, 150, 
184, 195, 253, 292, 308, 311, 322 
Longmeizi, 230 

Lord Goldtower, 193, 204, 208, 360, 362 
Lord Green Lad, 204, 360, 362 
Lord Horsemaster, 352 
Lord King of the East, 56, 57, 58 
Lord of the Tao, 44-45, 56, 360; birth of, 
44 

Lord Wind, 255 
Lotus flowers, 72 
Lu (mountain), 127 
Lu Chui, 215 

Lii Dongbin, 86, 97, 120, 126-32 
Luku shousheng jing, 335, 343; trl. 344- 
50 

lungs, 137-38, 144, 148, 165, 201; see 
five orbs 
Lu Sheng, 353 
Lu Xiujing, 65 

Madhyamika, 222, 223-24 

magical powers, 76, 118-19, 120, 124, 

126, 127, 132, 150, 152, 202, 203, 280, 
282, 290-99, 309, 321, 326, 355, 358; 
pretense of, 297 

magico-technicians, 4, 5 
Magu, 355-58 

Mahahayana, see Buddhism 

Maji (mountain), 307 

Mani, 71, 79 

Maonii, see Hairy Lady 

Mashi Huang, 352 

massage, 83, 145, 148, 154, 229 

Master Anqi, 353, 354 

Master Cloudchamber (Zhongli Quan), 

127, 129-32 

Master Firedragon, 127, 132 
Master Middleyellow, 200, 358 
Master Ning, 144 
Master of Mystery, 308 
Master of Pure Harmony, 155-58 
Master of Red Essence, 193 
Master of the Demon Valley, 50 
Master on the River, 96, 116, 118-19, 
173 

Master Redpine, 74, 142, 143, 252 



Index 


387 


Master Whitestone, 334, 358, 359 
Master with the Yellow Pupils, 290-91 
Master Xiyi, see Chen Tuan 
medicine, 4, 64, 88, 117, 120, 134, 145, 
157-59, 161-62, 163-68, 174, 239, 280, 
290-91, 295, 306, 326-27, 352, 357 
meditation, 80, 191, 221, 250; see con¬ 
centration, ecstatic excursions, insight, 
oblivion, sleep, visualization 
mercury, see cinnabar, lead 
microcosm, see grotto 
Middle Way, 90-91, 227-28 
mind, and eyes, 84, 85, 89; control of, 
64, 82, 84, 90, 98-99, 131, 171-72, 
221-22, 235, 238, 244, 252, 270, 279- 
80, 323; definition of, 80, 163; good¬ 
ness of, 100, 110; mechanical, 243-44; 
observation of, 238, 240; of immortals, 
241-46, 281-85, 288; ordinary, 321- 
22; phases of, 321-23; power of, 172- 
73; projected states of, 227-28, 241, 
320-21; purity of, 27-28, 86, 87, 217 
monasticism, see Complete Perfection 
al rules, see precepts 
Mother of the Tao, 116, 181 
Mountain Hermit, 46 
mouth, see Jade Pond 
mulberry, 274, 319, 357, 360 
Mystery Continent, 50 
Mystery Metropolis, 50, 69, 70 
mystics, 281-82 

Neiguan jing, 162; trl. 169-73 
Neijing yushu, 331, 339 
Neo-Confucianism, 272 
nine continents, 284, 294 
nine heavens, 51, 64, 67, 115 
nine palaces, 29-31, 39, 57, 62, 73, 171, 
179, 273 

nine tripods cinnabar, 306, 308 
Ningfengzi, see Master King 
Niwan Palace, 171, 173, 183, 209, 210, 
213 

non-action, 29-31, 57, 62, 73, 172, 215, 
217-18, 246, 252, 253, 257, 280, 285, 
286 

nonbeing, 23—24, 27, 33, 35, 66, 72, 177, 
196, 215, 218, 219, 223, 227-28, 284, 
316 

North, 29, 256,264,294; Lord of, 113, 115 


Northern Dipper, 61, 62, 201, 204, 209- 
10, 212-13, 214, 250, 255, 257, 261, 
311; stars of, 171, 173, 213; invocation 
of, 259-64 

Northern Emperor, 262, 265-67, 344, 350 
Niigua, 41 

Numinous Root, 184, 186, 187 
Numinous Treasure, 5, 34, 43, 61, 65, 
96, 100, 107, 109-10, 113, 132, 192, 
198, 335; lord of, 66, 67; drugs of, 149- 
53; myth of, 44-48 

oblivion, 23, 82, 84-85, 223, 235, 244, 
245-46, 274-75, 282, 301 
observation, 27, 191, 221-22; see insight 
Ocean Continent, 50 
Ocean of Energy, 180, 217, 321 
One, see Great One, Three Ones, True 
One 

ordeal, see examinations 
Orthodox Unity, see Celestial Masters 

palaces, in body, 113, 162, 171, 174, 176, 
178-80, 181, 199, 201, 317; see heav¬ 
ens 

Pangu, 162, 169, 170 
paradises, 34, 48-49 
pardon, 109 

partial emptiness, 225, 226-27 
Pass Gate, 185 
Penglai, 49, 54, 77, 353, 357 
Pengzu, 147, 155, 258 
pepper, 151, 152 

phoenix, 53, 255, 334, 353, 358, 360; as 
ornament, 336, 338, 341 
Phoenix-Unicorn Continent, 53, 78 
pine resin, 150, 152 
Plain Maiden, 153 

pledge offerings, 203, 308, 311-12, 349- 
50 

poverty, 239, 243 

prayer, 106, 107-12, 112-15, 174, 250, 
257, 259-64, 266 

precepts, 75-76, 95, 96, 97-98, 302; list 
of ten, 98-99; list of 180, 100-06 
Primal Lord, 310-11 
Prime Continent, 53 
Primordial King, 204, 207, 212 
Primordial Pass, 182 
purification, 82-83,98, 107, 132, 249, 308 



388 


Index 


Purple Court, 52, 91, 199, 214 
Purple Tenuity, 79 

Qi. see energy 
Qianjin fane, 320 
9ibo, 164-65 

•'ng, 65, 136, 141, 272 
dynasty, 49 

Qingjing jing, 12, 24; trl. 25-29 
Quan Tangwen, 325 
Quanzhen, see Complete Perfection 
Qu Baiting, see Lad Qu 
Queen Mother of the West, 34, 55, 56- 
62, 156, 193, 251, 268 
Qu Yuan, 250, 251 

Radiant Wondersound, 344,350 
Rain God, 254, 255 
real existence, 225, 226 
rebirth, 230-31, 240, 273, 334, 344-46, 
348; see karma and retribution 
Ren Yanqing, 48 

Rite of Mud and Ashes, 96, 107-12, 173- 
74 

ritual, 68, 95-96, 101, 107-12, 249, 328, 
336, 350 

ritual suicide, 305 
River God, 256 

Ruler of Fates, 171, 245, 268, 270, 333- 
34 

sage, 14, 91, 92, 100, 215, 223, 280, 283- 
85, 285-90, 320 

saliva, 174, 180, 184, 186, 212, 270, 315, 
321 

Sancai dingwei tu, 363 
Sancai tuhui, 170 
Sanhuang, see Three Sovereigns 
Santian zhengfa jing, 67, 335, 358; trl. 
359-62 

Sanwu liji, 168 

Sanyuan pin, 96, 98; trl. 100-06 
Sanyuan zhenyi jing, 192-93, 204; trl. 
204-14 

Scripture of Ascension to the Mystery, 
226-27, 241 

Scripture of Hidden Correspondences, 91 
Scripture of Original Time, 224, 227 
Scripture of Western Ascension, 73, 218, 
241 


Scripture on the Practice of Observation, 
224, 225 

scriptures, administration of, 61, 102, 
104, 106, 110, 200; and creation, 33, 
36-42, 66, 67; and gods, 209-12; be¬ 
stowal of, 45-47, 73, 96, 100-01, 
108, 117, 118-19, 132, 200-01, 268, 
310; debates on, 98; of Buddhism, 
78; recitation of, 98, 118; study of, 
87-88, 100, 105, 350; surrender to, 
95; types of, 63, 67-68; veneration 
of, 97, 99, 100-01 
seclusion, 82, 83, 86 
secrecy, 151, 308, 311, 314, 324-25 
selflessness, 131 
semen, see essence 

senses, 90, 161, 163, 173, 175, 218, 238, 
242, 324; gates of, 176 
sesame, 150-51, 152 
Seven Forests, 175 
Seven Treasures, 75 

sexual practices, 134, 153-59, 229, 250- 
51, 267-71 

shamans, 191, 249, 251, 267, 280, 290 
Shangqing, see Highest Clarity 
Shangqing lingbao dafa. 111, 114, 347 
Shaohao, 41 
Shennong, 41, 61, 142 
Shen Xi, 325, 326-28 
Shenxian zhuan, 97, 121, 281, 290, 305, 
325; trl. 121-26, 290-96, 336-28 
Shishuo xiny, 300; 301-02 

Shizhou ji, 34, 48; trl. 49-55 
Shun, 42 
Shuyi ji, 168 

Sima Chengzhen, 19, 80, 81, 223, 235, 
237 

Siming, see Ruler of Fates 
simplicity, 81, 197, 198, 206-07,260,286, 
288, 294 

sin, see karma and retribution 
Six Dynasties period, 5, 34, 43, 49, 65, 
96, 117, 121, 168 
Six Harmonies, 199 

Six Heavens (Palaces), 210, 259, 265- 
67, 362 

six intestines, 161-62 
Six-One Lute, 309 
six virtues, 175 
skull, 244—45 



Index 


389 


sleep, 80, 127, 236, 242, 271-76, 282; see 
dream 

snake, 124, 330 

Song dynasty, 6, 12, 24, 65, 86, 142, 229, 
230, 251, 271, 305, 313, 335, 343 
souls, 80, 83, 161, 163, 171, 173, 210, 
212, 250, 253, 259-64, 274 
Soushen ji, 281, 290; trl. 296-99 
Southern Palace (Office), 259-62, 265 
Sovereign of Heavenly Truth, 200 
spirit, and desires, 28; and immortality, 
80-81, 84-86, 206, 209, 215, 304, 324; 
definition of, 85, 172-73, 224; in body, 
172, 192, 194, 204, 219, 304, 320; in 
cosmology, 163, 172; nurturing of, 87, 
98, 152, 321; observation of, 224-25; 
purity of, 25, 110, 117, 173, 215, 244, 
250, 295, 320-21; Stove (nose), 187; 
wanderings of, 252-53, 273-74; see ec¬ 
static excursions, energy, essence 
spleen, 184, 187; see five orbs 
spontaneity, 22, 66, 92, 113, 216, 219, 
222, 242, 253, 280, 283, 289, 314, 324 
stars, 41-42, 62, 151, 162, 169, 191, 200- 
01, 204, 211, 250, 257-67, 274, 329- 
30, 340-41, 355; see Northern Dipper, 
sun and moon 

stems and branches, 229, 233, 258, 273, 
346-50 

Suling jing, 204, 207, 212 
Suiren, 41 

sun and moon, as windows, 300; course 
of, 23, 183, 246, 329; creation of, 33, 
35, 37, 169; essence of, 113, 204, 274, 
314; gods of, 75, 311; in alchemy, 314, 
317; in body, 162, 174, 180; longevity 
of, 150, 321; power of, 209, 247; visu¬ 
alization of, 204, 267, 269-71 
Sun Quan, 47 
Sunii, see Plain Maiden 
Sunil jing, 153 
Sun Simiao, 305, 319-20 

Tai (mountain), 61, 90, 301, 343 
Taibo (mountain), 319 
Taiji quan, 120 
Taiji tushuo, 26 
Taiping jing, 192, 193-94 
Taiping jing shengjun bizhi, 192, 193; 
trl. 194-97 


Taishang daojun, see Lord of the Tao 
Taishang laojun, see Venerable Lord 
Taixuan nil, see Lady of Great Mystery 
Taiyi, see Great One 

talismans, 33,43,45, 61, 68, 106-07, 111, 
121, 125, 210-12, 266, 312, 328, 330 
Tamba no Yasuyori, 135, 154 
Tang dynasty, 6, 19, 34, 35, 56, 64, 71, 
80, 120, 126, 192, 193, 215, 251, 267- 
68, 305, 325, 335 

Tao, and language, 11, 13, 15, 17, 20, 24, 
25, 29-30, 63, 228; and Virtue, 11-12, 
16, 19, 20-23, 28, 30, 85, 90, 118, 119, 
253, 288; awakening to, 84-85, 129, 
195, 222, 224, 230, 314; description of, 
11-12,19-20, 22, 25, 31, 219, 250, 253; 
in body, 133-34, 182, 192; in Daode 
jing, 13-18; in world, 31, 33, 63-64, 
116, 117, 236, 250, 285 
Taoism, beginnings, 4-5; canon, 1, 3, 6, 
63, 65-66; definition, 1; history, 3-7; 
path, 2, 3, 63, 80, 81-86, 117-18; 
practices, 5, 64, 80, 82, 117, 133-34, 
see body, breathing, gymnastics, medi¬ 
tation, sexual practices; schools, 4-6, 
12, 64; selections on, 3; studies of, 2 
teacher, relationship to, 100-01, 104, 106, 
108, 122 

teeth, clapping of, 145, 174, 259, 265, 
271; closing of, 186 
ten continents, see Shizhouji 
ten countries, 179-80 
ten directions, 45, 48-49, 57, 110, 344 
tests, see examinations 
Three Caverns, 64, 65-66, 67, 73, 108 
Three Clarities, 66, 68, 69-70, 78, 214, 
217, 336, 361 

Three Energies, 66, 68-69, 72 
Three Kingdoms, 47 
Three Ones, 192, 193, 204-14, 224 
Three Primes, 66, 91, 109, 182, 187, 207, 
270 

Three Sovereigns, 39-40, 42, 65, 206, 
294; Writings of, 200 
Three Treasures, 105, 175, 209 
Three Vehicles, 67, 70, 175, 176, 226, 227 
Three Witches, 176 

Three Worlds, 57, 69, 70, 79, 92, 110, 
175, 333, 341-42 
Three Worms, 144, 148, 184, 309 



390 


Index 


Thunder God, 255 

Tianguan santu, 250, 257; trl. 257-67 
Tianshi, see Celestial Masters 
Tiantai (mountain), 47 
Tianyinzi, 64-65, 80; trl. 80-86 
tiger, 59, 62, 124, 210, 291, 295, 316, 
317, 319, 326, 342, 348; see dragon 
tongue, see numinous Root 
trance, see oblivion 

tranquility, 16, 25-29, 62, 84, 85, 87, 172, 
225, 230, 244, 252, 321-23, 330 
Treasure Tree, 344, 345-46 
transformation, alchemical, 232, 305-13, 
314-17; and creation, 169; and immor¬ 
tality, 73, 108, 132, 217, 305, 324; and 
rebirth, 230, 232, 234; as ascension, 
303-04, 330-32; as digestion, 166; 
natural, 85, 172, 216, 242, 246, 271, 
361; of gods in prayer, 259-64; of Laozi, 
36, 63, 71, 72-80, 119, 182; of Tao, 22, 
119, 221; of Yu, 46; power over, 132, 
203, 294, 321, 324 

travels, see ecstatic excursions, wander¬ 
ings 

trickster, 281 

trigrams, 74, 174, 229, 231-33, 271, 294; 

see Book of Changes 
true lead, 315 

True One, 149, 192, 194, 197-203; ap¬ 
pearance of, 199; formula of, 200, 202, 
203; in alchemy, 233 
True Scripture of Great Pervasion, 207, 
210 

truth, levels of, 222, 224 
Tusita Heaven, 178 
twelve months, 179 
twelve-storied tower, 178-79, 186 
twelve years, 346-48, 349-50 
twenty-four energies, 204, 205 
Twofold Mystery, 223, 224 

Venerable Lord, as Laozi and the Tao, 3, 
34, 56, 176; as ox, 176; as seeker, 96, 
116-18, 241; creation by, 35—42, in 
body, 183; in heaven, 326-27; in prayer, 
108; instructing Ifln Xi, 73, 219; in¬ 
structing Zhang Daoling, 335-43; life 
of, 72-80; on diet, 150-52; on immor¬ 
tals’ chen, 335^3; on life and Tao, 169- 
73, 199; see Laozi, Highest Venerable 


Verses on the Vitalization of the Gods, 67 
vipasyana, 221 

visualization, 82, 84, 118, 173-74, 181- 
88, 192-93, 197, 198, 200, 204, 210- 
11, 212-14, 249-50, 257-67, 269-71, 
305, 320 

vows, 96, 97; list of, 99-100 

wanderings, 29-30, 87, 132, 199-200, 
202, 245, 307, 324, 355 
Wang Chongyang, 65, 86, 163, 174 
Wang Fangping, 355, 357-58 
Wang Jingxuan, 230 
Wang Qiao (Jumping Wang), 253 
Wangwu (mountain), 236 
weakwater, 53, 55, 59 
Wenxuan, 300 
Wind Mountain, 50, 52 
wine, 101, 124, 127, 299-301 
wisdom, 30, 87,101,117,217,236,240,283 
Wondrous Scripture of Great Being, 207, 
211 

Wormy Rebel, 56, 61 

Wu (kingdom), 46-47 

Wudou tanyi tujue, 201 

Wufuxu, 43, 44, 45, 135, 148; trl. 149-53 

Wushang biyao, 96, 107; trl. 107-15 

Wuyi (mountain), 230 

Wuyue zhenxing tu, 43 

Wuzhen plan, 305, 313; trl. 314-19 

Xianyang, 55 
Xiaodao lun, 168 
Xiaojing yuansheng qi, 152 
Xiao Shi, 353 

Xiuzhen shishu, 146, 181, 314 
Xiuzhen taiji hunyuan tu, 51, 165, 322 
Xiwang mu, see Queen Mother of the 
West 

Xuandu, see Mystery Metropolis 
Xuanzhen jingjue, 251, 268; trl. 268-71 
Xuanzhu xinjing zhu, 193, 215; trl. 215- 
19 

Xu Fu, 50, 320 
Xu Laile, 48 
Xu Lingqi, 48 
Xu Shi, 353 

Yama, 350 
Yang Xi, 5 



Index 


391 


Yao, 42 

Yellow Court, 181, 204, 212; god in, 184- 
85; location of, 182-83; Scripture of, 
see Huangting jing 

Yellow Emperor, 4, 30-31, 41, 56, 61-62, 
144, 153, 164-65, 199-200, 253, 303, 
308, 351-52 

Yellow Millet Dream, 127-29 
Yellow River, 46 
Yellow Springs, 343 
Yellow Turbans, 5, 194 
Yijing, 4, 35, 81, 82, 169, 229, 271, 313 
yin and yang, 22, 33, 35, 37, 39, 41, 59, 
61, 64, 68, 75, 80, 83, 85, 134, 147, 
151, 154, 155-56, 162, 164, 166, 169, 
171, 172, 183-84, 192, 194, 199, 216, 
221, 229, 232, 234, 239, 245, 260, 268, 
274, 288, 310, 311, 314, 317, 345 
Yin Changsheng, 312 
Yinshizi jinzuo fa, 134, 135; trl. 136-41 
Yin Xi, 73, 74, 77, 78, 173, 219 
Yongcheng jixian lu, 34, 56, 305, 325; trl. 

57-62, 330-32 
Yu, 42, 45-46, 47 
Yuanqi lun, 168, trl. 169 
Yuanshi tianzun, see Heavenly Venerable 
Yuanyou, 250, 251; trl. 251-57 
Yufang bijue, 135, 154; trl. 155-59 
Yu Laoqiao, 48 

Yunji qiqian, 35, 43, 56, 64, 65, 66, 141, 
162, 168, 181, 235, 320, 325, 326 


Zengxiang liexian zhuan, 58, 60, 74, 121, 
123, 128, 143, 293, 298, 335, 351, 354, 
356; trl. 126-32, 355-58 
Zhang Boduan, 305, 313 
Zhang Daoling, 3, 4, 194, 336-37 
Zhang Wanfu, 335 
Zhang Zifang, 127 
Zhao Daoyi, 116, 272 
Zhen Dingguang, 48 
Zheng Siyuan, 48 
Zheng Yin, 307 

Zhongli Quan, 121; see Master Cloud 
chamber 

Zhongnan (mountain), 127 
Zhou Dunyi, 272 
Zhou dynasty, 23, 34, 42, 73 
Zhuang Zhou, 12, 242, 244-45 
Zhuangzi, 4, 12, 29, 81, 135, 218, 223, 
226, 239, 241, 281-82, 285; trl. 29-32, 
242-47,282-85 
Zhuan He, 291 
Zhuanxu, 42, 256 
Zhu Linghian, 330 
Zhurong, see Blessed Melter 
Zigong, 243-44 
Zuo Ci, 296-99, 306-07 
Zuowang lun, 19, 223, 235, 320; trl. 236- 
41 



