
Taoist 

canon 

A Historical Companion 

to the Daozang VOLUME 2 

The Modern Period 

Edited by 

Kristofer Schipper and 
Franciscus Verellen 

The University of Chicago Press 
Chicago & London 




Introduction: Taoism in the 
Early Modern Era 



The era starting with the advent of the Song dynasty in the second half of the tenth 
century may be considered the beginning of the modern age in the history of China. 
When compared to previous times, great changes in all aspects of China’s civilization 
are manifest, and perhaps nowhere are these changes more visible than in the evolu- 
tion of Taoism. 

The rise of local political and religious lay organizations, especially in the regions 
south of the Yangzi River, is certainly one of the most important factors in this change. 
During the previous century, the division of the country into a great number of semi- 
autonomous regions greatly favored the emancipation of local societies, where Taoism 
had, and still has, its natural habitat. 

We see, especially among the townspeople of the Jiangnan )T area, the rise of 
associations ( hui #) in honor of local saints. Apart from worship, these associations 
had many functions. The most important associations were often vocational groups 
comparable to European guilds and merchant corporations. Others were pilgrimage 
associations, maintaining networks between different localities. Still others had more 
precise aims, such as performing deeds of merit: keeping the temple and the locality 
clean, reciting scriptures and teaching literary skills, caring for the old and the sick by 
establishing hospitals and dispensaries, helping the physically and mentally disabled 
by housing them in the temples, liberating animals and advocating vegetarianism, 
printing and publishing, and even collecting old paper (any piece with writing on it 
was deemed sacred). Many associations ran schools and trained young people in the 
martial arts so as to be able to protect the community when the need arose. All these 
deeds were gongfu Xf) ^ (religious merit; a term we now associate with the Chinese 
martial arts as practiced within the context of temple associations). Because all these 
activities were performed as a service to the community, we call these associations 
“liturgical organizations.” 

The temple-and-marketnetworkgreatly developed in theFive Dynasties period (907- 
960). Formerly only a few Taoist saints had been officially recognized. Now, in the 
new and generally short-lived kingdoms that emerged, many local saints came into 
the limelight. The worship of the great saints of the Jiangnan area— such as Guandi 
the embodiment of martial virtue; Wenchang dijun H'Sflt, who became 



[ 634 ] Introduction 






Introduction [ 63s ] 



the patron saint of the literati; Mazu the fisherman’s daughter who became the 
protectress of seafarers; Xu Jingyang, the immortal official; and many more— de- 
veloped greatly, and the associations that promoted them grew in power and wealth. 
Over time, these powerful nonofficial organizations distributed their own sacred 
literature. They attracted their own clergy and created rituals in which the veneration 
of their saint had a central position. Thus local Taoist lineages developed, and many 
scriptures in the present volume bear witness to this development. 

The growing importance of local centers was reinforced by imperial patronage. 
Already at the beginning of die Tang dynasty, imperial patronage was obtained for 
the worship of Xu Jingyang, and this patronage was reinforced in later periods. 
Emperor Xuanzong (r. 712-756) of the Tang dynasty canonized Zhang Daoling Mil 
H, the First Heavenly Master. This measure did not benefit the region of northern 
Sichuan, where the ecclesia originally came from, but a Taoist temple in honor of 
this patriarch diat stood at an important junction of the trade routes that finked the 
Jiangnan area to the provinces of Jiangxi, Fujian, and Guangdong. This place, on 
Longhu shan (_L| , was purportedly the spot where Zhang Daoling had obtained 
the Tao and where his descendants had continued to five. The emperor also recognized 
the chiefs of this lineage as the legitimate holders of the tide of Heavenly Master. 
Thereby the new Zhengyi IE^ patriarchy of the Longhu shan was created, which 
would become vasdy influential during the period under consideration here. Also 
toward the end of the Tang (618-907), other southern centers claimed their historical 
ancestry and established lineages of patriarchs. The Maoshan ^ | 1 | lineage, going back 
to Lady Wei Huacun, who had inspired Yang Xi in writing the Shangqing texts, 
was construed by a Taoist named Li Bo in the early ninth century (see YJQQ 5). 
As to the Lingbao tradition, it was claimed by a temple on Gezhao shan [_L| in 
Jiangxi province. The Lingbao declared Ge Xuan, the ancestor of Ge Hong and a 
famous Taoist of the Three Kingdoms period (220-265), its founder. During the Ming 
(1368-1644), the authority of the Longhu shan Heavenly Master lineage over the two 
other centers became predominant, so much so that the Maoshan and Gezhao shan 
gradually lost their identity before being taken over by the Quanzhen order during 
the Qing period (1644-1911). 

In the beginning of the Song period, the development of local and regional orga- 
nizations could no longer be ignored by the central government. In a series of bold 
religious and political actions. Emperor Zhenzong (997-1022) of the Northern Song, 
after having first been sanctified as the representative of the Tao on Earth by the revela- 
tion of Heavenly Letters, undertook to create a network of officially sponsored Tao- 
ist temples called Tianqing guan TEStS- The Taoist priests who were appointed as 
keepers of the sanctuaries were recognized as government officials. The state retained 
control of the sanctuaries, but it allowed many local associations to participate in the 



different activities related to them. In the Tianqing guan, not only the Yellow Em- 
peror, the divine ancestor of the dynasty, was worshiped. Some of these deities— such 
as the Three Officials (sanguan HUT) - belonged to the Taoist ecclesia; others were 
dynastic deities whose worship was an imperial prerogative, such as the Lord of Tai- 
shan. Soon, next to the Tianqing guan, and with imperial approval, shrines appeared 
to many other saints and gods. The modem temple was born, with its lay organization 
that replaced the ancient dioceses of the ecclesia of the Heavenly Master. 

Throughout the Northern Song, emperors maintained important Taoist functions. 
Emperor Huizong (r. 1101-1125) was actually titled Lord of the Tao (Daojun jlH). Yet 
we cannot speak of an “official religion.” The temple network of which the emperor 
was the head existed side by side with, but separate from, the official Confucian bu- 
reaucracy, although there were many institutional and also informal finks. 

At the beginning of the modern era, the interpenetration between the Three Teach- 
ings was strong. Among the Buddhist schools, Chan (Zen) Buddhism was influenced 
by Taoism. The other great movement, that of Pure Land Buddhism, in turn influ- 
enced Taoist ritual practice. Confucianism owed an immense debt to both Buddhism 
and Taoism, which had given it the transcendent dimension it was hitherto lacking. 
But as Taoism became more and more immersed in local society and popular culture, 
it became estranged from the other two religions, or, more exactly, Buddhism and 
Confucianism gradually distanced themselves from it. While the idea of the unity of 
the Three Teachings remained one of the cornerstones of the political discourse, in 
practice only Taoism continued to believe in the dialogue. The two other doctrines 
tended toward increased differentiation. The unity of the Three Teachings therefore 
became primarily a Taoist cause and was only actively supported by Confucianism and 
Buddhism at times when Chinese culture as a whole was threatened, as during the 
Mongol period. 

The main challenge for Taoism, as reflected in the texts of the period under con- 
sideration here, were the great changes due to the emancipation of local cults. Many 
of these cults were survivals from antiquity, such as those that venerated the Earth 
God (she frfc or tudi ±JflJ), the Thunder God ( leishen ft#), and many nature spirits. 
Others, already mentioned, were cults of local saints. Invariably, the deities of these 
cults manifested themselves through spirit mediums, according to the age-old tradi- 
tions of Chinese shamanism. How were these deities and their priests to be assimilated 
within the framework of Taoist thought and practice? And even more challengingly, 
how were the rites performed by the shamans to be integrated with the Taoist liturgical 
organization? 

As the texts in the Daozang show, the first challenge, that of incorporating the 
gods of ancient China and the saints of local temples into the Taoist pantheon and 
theology, was met simply by assimilating them with cosmic energies (qi), most often 






[ 636 ] Introduction 



Introduction [ 637 ] 



represented by a star or a constellation. This sublimation was not unlike the transla- 
tion of mortals into immortality, as already practiced through the liturgy of the great 
Taoist zhai fj? and jiao St services. Thus the canonization these deities had received 
from the imperial institution (guofeng 81 Tf ) was matched by the conferral of a Tao- 
ist investiture ( daofeng MM) to them. Far more complex, and therefore the subject 
of many treatises and discussions, was the profusion of rites related to these deities. 
These rites were by and large of an exorcistic nature, and the new saints, such as Lord 
Guan §f ff, played an important role in them, first with the rank of general, then as 
marshal, and finally as a high celestial deity. 

Exorcistic rites had, of course, always existed in Taoism, and many scattered refer- 
ences related to them may be culled from medieval source material. Some rites, like 
the exorcistic spells of the God of the North (Beidi had been incorporated 

into the revelations of Yang Xi (see 1016 Zhen’gao io.ioa-nb,i5.ia-4b and# Taishang 
dongyuan beidi tianpeng burning xiaozai shenzbou mictojing). Exorcism was also part 
of medical practice, as can be seen from the “Jinjing in Sun Simo’s Qianjin 

yifang However, exorcists had never gained high social recognition, and 

their rites had only rarely been put into writing. 

All this was now to change. From the beginning of the Song dynasty onward, we 
are confronted with spirit-medium cults and related exorcist rituals that, although 
local in origin, gained wide recognition at court and obtained imperial favor (e.g., the 
worship of the Yisheng baode zhenjun fiR H at the imperial court; see 128s 

Yisheng baode zhuan by Wan g Qi n ruo ). The early tenth-century work 1237 Sandong 
xiudao yi presents, in addition to the traditional Tang liturgical organization and its 
ordination grid, the first mention of a minor exorcistic order that practiced the Thun- 
der magic (leifa If ) of the Emperor of the North ( Beidi leigong fa {ek ; 9a). 

Henceforth, many rites (fafe ) related to these exorcist practices became institutional- 
ized and established their own initiations and lineage organizations, independent of 
the existing Taoist liturgical structures. 

Modern Taoism distinguishes between the liturgical capability of the Taoist Scholar 
(daosbi Mi) and that of the Ritual Master (fashi flrfl ) or Ritual Official (faguan 
Hf ). This distinction is again reflected in the differences in authority conferred by the 
register (lu H ) and by the rite (fa ). Among the sources that bear on this subject, 
the most complete and enlightening are the Taishang tiantan yuge 
and its sequel, Taishang hundong cbiwen niiqing zhaoshu tianlii 

in 1220 Daofa huiyuan 249-52. In the latter, it is stated explicitly that “the 
fa has to follow the register [lu], and there can be no discrepancy between the two” 
(249.13b). As the regular Taoist clergy and the Ritual Masters worked side by side in 
the same environment, their mutual integration became a fundamental prerequisite 
and a continual process. 



The above-quoted texts in the Daofa huiyuan derive from the Tianxin zhengfa ft 
'L'lE lineage, which was, according to its own accounts, one of the earlier Song ex- 
orcistic lineages to obtain official recognition. Globally speaking, the Tianxin zhengfa 
appears to have been the first lineage to have been codified by means of a written cor- 
pus. It established a historical lineage beginning with Tan Zixiao in Fujian during 
the Five Dynasties and was well represented by Deng Yougong until the end of the 
Northern Song. The lineage claimed to be ultimately derived from the First Heavenly 
Master himself. During the Southern Song (1127-1279) and later, the Tianxin zhengfa 
was indeed considered to be a part, even a fundamental part, of the rites of the Way 
of the Heavenly Master. In fact, however, its exorcistic rites during which a demon is 
first captured and imprisoned, then interrogated and sentenced, are elaborations of 
ancient shamanistic seances. 

Also comparatively early, and even more famous, were the Shenxiao ^ rites, 
which are said to have been introduced by the court Taoist Lin Lingsu (1076-1120) 
and his disciple Wang Wenqing (1093-1153). Few precise facts can be found 

to link the Shenxiao texts preserved in the Daozang with the activities of these daoshi 
at the court of Song Huizong, as all of the relevant books can be shown to have been 
written or at least seriously reedited during the Southern Song period. The name 
“Shenxiao” refers to a supreme sphere in the heavenly universe, where higher deities 
than those hitherto recognized dwelled. This reference allowed for the establishment 
of a new list of nine Heavenly Worthies the so-called Nine Sovereigns (Jiuchen 

flM), the first being the Original Saint Governor of the Heavens, the Heavenly 
Worthy of Long Life of the Southern Apex, Founder of the Myriad Rites of the 
Celestial Abodes of Shenxiao (Shenxiao tiangong wanfa zhi zong, Nanji changsheng 
tongtian yuansheng tianzun Next to 

the supreme god of the Shenxiao, the Taiyi jiuku tianzun Z* ^ H and the Lei- 
sheng puhua tianzun represent the cosmic forces related, respectively, 

to death and life. These names are Taoist translations of the bodhisattva Ksitigarba 
and Samantabhadra. The presence of two essentially Buddhist deities at the heart of 
modem Taoist ritual should not come as a surprise. The Lingbao ritual for the uni- 
versal salvation of souls (pudu |f ®) had since the late medieval period become more 
and more predominant, and with it the rites of sublimation ( liandu MS) that aim at 
forging an immortal body for the suffering dead. These rites involve the purification 
and divine rebirth of a spirit through the practice of Inner Alchemy by the officiant. 
Such Inner Alchemy techniques were combined with purification and exorcism rites 
that marshaled the forces of the thunder. These latter practices were by and large 
borrowed and adapted from Tantric Buddhism. Here much remains to be done in 
terms of research to elucidate the original Tantric antecedents of Song Taoist ritual. 
Tantrism, introduced in China during the late Tang, does not seem to have succeeded 




[ ] Introduction 



Introduction [ 639 ] 



at that time in establishing itself as an autonomous Buddhist school, but it did have 
an important influence on Taoism, and many Tantric practices found their way into 
Taoist liturgy. 

During the Southern Song, the combination of the above-mentioned elements 
became consolidated into a large ritual synthesis that received the general appellation 
of the Great Rites of the Shangqing Lingbao [Shangqing lingbao dafa 

). Within this global framework, expounded in a number of important manuals 
and handbooks, we see the successive incorporation of different lineages, such as the 
Yutang dafa EE. 1 g[ ofLu Shizhong. Lu, at the beginning of the Southern Song 
period, claimed to continue the methods of theTianxin zhengfa, but by incorporating 
them into the Lingbao liturgy for the universal salvation of souls. Other influential 
currents were the Tongchu H rites of Maoshan, the Jade Pivot (Yushu EE fll ) scrip- 

tures of Bo Yuchan, and finally the Qingwei school of Zhao Yizhen. But there 
are many other movements, especially related to leifa , that call for further research. 

Owing perhaps to the rupture with its historical antecedents— the Heavenly Mas- 
ter ecclesia and the ancient scriptural transmission of the Lingbao and Shangqing 
canons— and perhaps also to the emancipation of local cults and their spirit-medium 
rites, Taoism in the modem age seems to increasingly lose a sense of its own historical 
reality. Zhang Daoling 3 §xil§l becomes the revealing spirit of the Tianxin zhengfa 
rites, while Lu Dongbin continues, century after century, to transmit his Inner 
Alchemy secrets and to write poetry. These and other divine patriarchs also write 
commentaries to sacred scriptures (e.g., 99 Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun 
yushu bcwjing jizhu). The great commentary to the Tuhmng benxing jing E El. ^ (Ef 
If by the Ming scholar Luo Hongxian M$i 9 t (1504-1564) is also adorned with 
prefaces by saints such as Zitong dijun (Wenchang H ), Lu Dongbin, 

Qiu Chuii, and the Heavenly Marshal Deng &|L These saints are moreover the 
authors of a large part of the commentary (see 1440 Huangjing zhujie). 

To all these changes in the Taoist traditions must be added the widespread use 
of printing, which made possible the dissemination of texts formerly transmitted to 
initiates only. Thus the exclusivity that formerly characterized the transmission of 
many liturgical texts could no longer be maintained. During the Yuan and Ming pe- 
riods, some Taoist scriptures— such as 622 Taishang xuanling beidou beriming yansheng 
zhenjing and 623 Taishang xuanling beidou benming changsheng miao, or 1442 Taishang 
sanyuan cifu shezui jie’e xiaozai yansheng booming miaojing — were among the most 
widely printed and distributed books in China, surpassing the circulation of Buddhist 
and Confucian works. In what respect are we then justified to maintain the heading 
“Texts in Internal Circulation” for this part? 

Even while the old system was no longer universally adhered to, rules relating to 
transmission and ordination still appear to have been strictly applied. Some books 



were circulated in a printed form, but they were by no means considered fit to be 
placed into anyone’s hands. The printed versions of the successive Daozang were con- 
fined to Taoist centers and almost never shown to outsiders. Moreover, even popular 
scriptures of devotion, to be recited and venerated in people’s homes, carried explicit 
warnings as to their exclusivity and as to the many rules to be observed when handling 
them. Finally, what certain scriptures may have lost in exclusivity as a result of their 
widespread circulation was largely made up for by the very secrecy that surrounded 
the new exorcist techniques of the Tianxin zhengfa and Shenxiao rites. All in all, the 
ritual texts of Taoism continued to be accessible for ordained daoshi and initiated 
practitioners only. 




[ 640 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 64.1 ] 



3. A Texts in General Circulation 



3.A.1 Philosophy 

3.A.l.a Commentaries on Ancient Philosophers 

3. A. 1 .a. 1 The Daodejing 

Daode zhenjing lun M ti! JUS ,1m 

4 juan 

By Sima Guang W] (1019-1086) 

689 (fasc. 373) 

“Essay on the Way and Its Power.” This essay was originally entided Daode lun 
shuyao iM era 1? (“A Summary of the Discourses on the Daode jing ”) and divided 
into two juan (VDL 153). 

Sima Guang considers that the Laozi should not be divided into two books, one 
on the Tao, the other on the De. His commentary follows the traditional order of the 
chapters, with one paragraph per chapter, but without tides. Sima Guang was one of 
the first commentators (possibly the first) to punctuate after you and wu te in the 

opening sentences of the Laozi: “wu [negation] is the name of the origin of Heaven 
and Earth; you [affirmation] is the name of the mother of the ten thousand beings; 
forever in the wu shaft thou contemplate the wonder, forever in the you shaft thou 
contemplate its fringes.” 

But wu and you are here seen as only makeshift names. The Confucian virtues are 
here seen as upheld: ren fc (humanity) and yi H (duty) are contained within the Tao, 
which is why they make their appearance when the Tao declines; when Laozi rejects 
knowledge and ren, it is because in their time of decadence, these virtues are no more 
than simulacra of their true meaning. 

Isabelle Robinet 



Daode zhenjing cangshi zuanwei pian 

10 juan 

By Chen Jingyuan Pj|;ll7C,zz Taichu or Taixu hao Bixu zi ^lM~F 

or Zhenjing U 5 pf; 1072 

714 (fasc. 418-420) 

“Subtleties Culled From the Storehouse of the Way and Its Power.” The term pian 
Ws (text) has been added to this title to distinguish the text from die two commen- 
taries that follow it as sequels in the Daozang. The author collected a great number 
of editions and commentaries of the Daodejing and kept them in a special room. In 
this work, he presents what he considers to be the subde words of the ancient sages 
regarding the Daodejing (see the preface, 6b, and 9b-ioa). 

Chen Jingyuan (1024-1094) was a Taoist master from Tiantai who later resided 
at Lushan. He wrote numerous commentaries and other works, though only a few of 
these survive. As a disciple of Zhang Wumeng (952?-io5i), he belongs to die 

lineage of Chen Tuan. 

The present work is preceded by (1) an introduction by the author devoted in the 
main to the mythology of the Laozi; (2) a “Dissertation on the Laozi ” by Ge Bi H 
(zi Cizhong T , hao Wenkang gong jp. Hi & ) from Lingying guan ft $£ M in Shan- 
shan HE [i| ; and (3) a preface by Yang Zhonggeng dated 1258, stating that a 

printed edition of this commentary was presented to the emperor (in 1072, as specified 
in 71s Daode zhenjing cangshi zuanwei kaiti kewen shu 1.4b). 

This commentary is noted in the bibliographies as consisting of two juan. It is also 
said that the same author wrote z Daode zhu likewise in two juan (see Songshi 205.5178 

and the biography of Chen Jingyuan in LZTT 49.5a). The question therefore arises 
whether Chen Jingyuan wrote two different commentaries on the Laozi. 

The present commentary has been preserved, wholly or in part, in anthologies such 
as 724 Daode zhenjing jiyi (which contains the shortest version), 707 Daode zhenjing 
jizhu , 718 Daode zhenjing gushan ji, and 716 Daode zhenjing cangshi zuanwei shouchao. 
Some of these versions accord with each other (cf. 707 Daode zhenjing jizhu 1.1a and 724 
Daode zhenjing jiyi 3.4a); others differ (cf. 707 Daode zhenjing jizhu 2.i7b-i8a, i8b-i9b, 
and 724 Daode zhenjing jiyi 13.333-343). Occasionally, these versions correspond to the 
present text (e.g., 2.2b-3a and 718 Daode zhenjing gushan ji 2.4b-5a and 724 Daode zhen- 
jing jiyi 13.33a); sometimes they diverge (cf. 2.1b and 718 Daode zhenjing gushan ji 2.1b). 
Nevertheless, it would be wrong to consider the present text and its other versions as 
having issued from different sources. On the whole, they represent one and the same 
text, despite occasional variants. The present version of the text appears to have been 
abridged, especially when comparing it to quotations found in 724 Daode zhenjing 
jiyi. 

In his prefatory remarks (6b), the author reviews the fundamentals of his under- 




[ 642 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 643 ] 



standing of the Daodejing, which, as he states in his commentary, applies equally to 
governing the state and the self. Chen Jingyuan selects phrases from the Laozi 
that sum up his reading of the work, and he uses them to illustrate government by 
nonaction on the political level, a life of withdrawal without desires on the personal 
level, and, on the metaphysical plane, the ineffability of the Tao. His commentary is a 
work of recapitulation that provides a synthesis of interpretations of the Daodejing. It 
presents the distinctions between essence ( ti ft ) and function (yong ), between the 
physical and metaphysical spheres, between the “roof” and the “leaving of traces,” be- 
tween the “I” and the “other,” between the notion of real nature received from Heaven 
(xing ft) and to which one must return without trespassing beyond its limits, and 
that of the passions ( qing fit) that engender distinctions. All these distinctions must 
vanish in “total forgetfulness” and in “coalescent unity.” 

Our commentary does not neglect the dialectics of wu and you (nonbeing and be- 
ing), and presents the most representative of the interpretations of Heshang gong. 
Chen Jingyuan adopts the explanation of “nourishing the spirit and purifying the 
body” within the context of techniques applying to the circulation of qi and blood. 

On various occasions he makes a distinction between the “ancient* ’ interpretations 
inspired by Taoist practices and applicable to both the individual and the state— which 
include practices of breathing and visual meditation as well as cosmological specula- 
tions— and contemporary interpretations that do not go beyond the sphere of indi- 
vidual conduct and that fall within the category of ethical and mystical practices. 

This commentary is also interesting for the way it links the Daodejing to the com- 
mentaries of diverse schools of Taoist texts and to the Confiician classics. Among the 
various schools we find that of Lu Xisheng There are long fragments of the 

now lost parts of the commentary by Yan Zun. The Taoist texts referred to are those 
of the Zhuangzi and, above all, the Huainan zi (cf. 1184 Huainan hongliejie ), as well as 31 
Huangdiyinfujing, 666 Xisheng jing, and so on. The most frequendy quoted Confiician 
classics linked to the Daodejing are the Tijing (including many unattributed borrowed 
phrases and interpretations of the hexagrams), the Lunyu , the Shijing, and the Mengzi, 
whose flood-like breath ( haoran zhi f’Siil) is assimilated to the median qi. 

The cosmogonic system of our author is clearly inspired by Yan Zun, and al- 
though Zhang Wumeng is not mentioned by name, Yang Zhongkeng in his preface 
states that Chen Jingyuan here transmits the essence of his master’s doctrine. We 
find indeed that Inner Alchemy constitutes an important element throughout the text. 
The spirit of synthesis characteristic of this current of thought pervades the work, and 
the vocabulary of this school is reflected in the many allusions and terms stemming 
from Inner Alchemy (see, for instance, 2.2a, 5.12b, 10.7b). Furthermore, theTaiji 
is constandy assimilated to the primordial qi, which would seem to confirm the ties 
that no doubt linked Chen Jingyuan to the Chen Tuan school. 



Finally, as the author of works of a philological nature, Chen Jingyuan intro- 
duces into this commentary observations concerning variants in the Laozi text, com- 
paring the versions of Wang Bi, Heshang gong. Emperor Xuanzong(r. 712-756), 
and an ancient manuscript (guben i^j $). 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing zhuan iM Jit SI M fil 

4 juan 

ByLu Huiqing 1078 

686 (fasc. 369) 

“Commentary on the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” Lu Huiqing 
(1031-1110) held high ministerial positions. This work was presented to the emperor in 
1078. It is mentioned in the bibliographical catalogues as comprising two juan (VDL 
104). 

The commentary is placed in the traditional order, at the end of each chapter of the 
Laozi text, and not after each sentence or phrase. It is quoted in 718 Daode zhenjing 
qushanji with important variants (compare 718 Qushanji i.2b-3a; 13b; 2.5b with our 
text 1.1b; 1.5a; 1.11b, respectively). It is also quoted in 724 Daode zhenjing jiyi 1.22a, 24b, 
and elsewhere, with substantial divergences from our text (i.4a-b) as well as from 
724 Zhenjing jiyi 5.2ob-2ia. The quotations in 718 Qushanji and 724 Zhenjing jiyi also 
diverge: the commentary on chapter 1 of the Laozi is virtually the same in our text as 
in 724 Zhenjing jiyi, but it is different in 718 Qushanji (compare i.5a-b in the present 
text with 718 Qushanji 1.13a and 724 Zhenjing jiyi i.i9b-2ob). 

Within each chapter, this commentary follows the development of Laozi’s thought 
phrase by phrase, providing constant examples from the Daodejing as illustrations, 
with the result that the text comments on itself. Allusions to the Zhuangzi are also 
oblique. Digressions are rare. The beginning of the commentary reveals a Madhya- 
mika influence. The pedagogical usefulness of the latter can be seen in the mann er by 
which the commentary explains the negative formulas of the Laozi as instructions to 
avoid affirmation of any sort (1.19b, see also 1.18b). 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing jizhu il R I? !£ 

10 juan 

Colophon by Liang Jiong 1098 

706 (fasc. 395 - 398 ) 

“Collected Commentaries on the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” The 
collection comprises the commentaries of Heshang gong, Wang Bi, Emperor 
Xuanzong (r. 712-756) of the Tang, and Wang Pang (1042-1076). The colophon by 




[ 644 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 64 s] 



Liang Jiong, military judge of Yingzhou H 'jf| , explains that an official by the name of 
Zhang (his personal name is not given) had these commentaries printed after having 
them edited by a “worthy scholar.” There are many other editions of the first three 
commentaries in the present collection, but the fourth— by Wang Pang, the son of 
Wang Anshi (1021-1086), who also wrote an important commentary on the 

Zhuangzi (743 Nanhua zhenjing xinzhuan)— survives only here in a complete version. 
The same commentary is partially preserved in 724 Daode zhenjing jiyi and 718 Daode 
zhenjing qushanji. The hypothesis put forward by Wang Zhongmin in Laozi kao at- 
tributing the present edition to Wen Ruhai ;£$[} is untenable. Wen lived under the 
Tang (see VDL 138). 

There are three prefaces. Those by Emperor Xuanzong and Ge Xuan are well 
known. The third is by Wang Pang, who states that it was written in 1070. 

A comparison of the Wan g Pan g commentary in our text with the fragments pre- 
served in 724 Zhenjing jiyi shows that the present version, although generally complete, 
has been abridged in some places (compare our text 1.1a and 1.6a with 724 Zhenjing jiyi 
1.25a and i.27a-29b, respectively; the passage from Wang Pang’s commentary given 
in 724 Zhenjing jiyi 5.2ib-22a is missing altogether in the present version). 

The commentary by Wang Pang belongs to those that attempt a synthesis be- 
tween the Three Teachings ( sanjiao ): Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism. Wang 
Pang often compares Confucianism to the seasons of spring and summer, Taoism to 
autumn and winter, these being the times of fruition, of harvest and gathering. Laozi 
brings all together and makes all things return to the One, to their “fundamental 
nature,” and to quiet peacefulness. It is this gathering that enables the renewal of 
blossoming in the following spring and summer (see Wang Pang’s preface, page 
6b, and the passages on 3.19a, 4.7b, 5.24a, 6.18a). Wang Pang opposes Wang Bi’s 
interpretation insofar as Wang Pang considers that Laozi recognized mi &£ (non- 
being) and you ^ (being) to be interdependent, but that Laozi’s thought concentrates 
on wu, whereas the Confucian scriptures are concerned with you (compare also 724 
Zhenjing jiyi i.28b-29b). Wang Pang follows the example of Sima Guang W]| 
(1019-1086) by placing punctuation, in the opening sentences of the first chapter of 
the Daode jing, after wu and you, and not after yu (desire), as is customary (see 689 

Daode zhenjing lun). 

Wang Pang’s commentary centers on the concept of xing ‘ft (nature), which has 
here the connotation of the “fundamental nature” of humanity, the vehicle of tran- 
scendence in human beings, identified by Wang Pang with thepu the “uncarved 
block” of the Laozi (see 5.8b, 8.21b). He also equates this concept of nature with the 
haoran jp (the exaltation of the spirit), in Mengzi (see 10.9b). Wang Pang advo- 
cates humanity’s “return to its nature” (fuxing Ut'[4), an expression borrowed from 



the Tiantai school of Buddhism and that Li Ao (774-836) already had made 
the tide of his famous essays, Fuxing shu 1S14iB. To “return” in this way is also “to 
examine the core of one’s nature” ( jinxing 814 ), an idea that refers to the Tying and 
that here becomes synonymous Withjuming fjf op (return to destiny), an expression 
taken from Laozi. All throughout his work, Wang Pang juggles with these three 
expressions, each of which comes from one of the Three Teachings. 

Wang Pang often quotes the Zhuangzi (see 1.8b and especially 3.32a, where he 
makes an interesting comparison between Laozi and Zhuangzi), as well as the Tijing 
and the Mengzi. He likewise quotes many Confucian classics: the Lunyu , the Shujing , 
the Shijing, the Liji, and others. He uses some Buddhist concepts, especially in the 
context of the dialectic discourse of the conciliation of the opposites wu zndyou, action 
and nonaction, unity and duality (see, for instance, 7.11a and 12a). Wang frequendy 
pairs double negations to demonstrate the fact that these concepts mutually abolish 
and also complete each other (e.g., “appearances are neither illusory nor nonreal”; 
7.12a). Several times, he uses the expression “things cannot move” (wu hu neng qian 
M ; 3-8b, 8.12a), which is reminiscent of the tide of an essay by Sengzhao ff| H 
(374-414). 

The Taoism of Wang Pang is essentially philosophical. For him, to “nourish life” 
is to “forget the I” and to become a “being without mind” ( wuxin 3.34a, 35a, 

35b). Thus humans can achieve “mystical identification” (xuantong 3.33b), the 

coincidence of opposites such as wu and you, of the One and the ten thousand trans- 
formations (see 5.4a and 25a; 6.17a). There is virtually no mention of Taoist practices, 
although in 2.11a we find a reference to Taoist anthropology: the triad of essence ( jing 
ff), spirit (shen j^), and pneuma (qi Jjfi,) that form the human being. Wang rejects 
quietism (see 4.21a and 7.9b, 25b) as well as asceticism. He considers that the wish to 
escape from hunger and cold are part of human nature. 

Wang’s commentary extols the role of the saint who “embodies the Tao” and “goes 
to the extreme of his own nature,” who “governs the world” (4.11a, 12a; 5.25a), who 
masters all transformations and is capable of all things (8.29a). In this spiritual achieve- 
ment resides his longevity, which establishes a smooth harmony with transformations 
and vicissitudes, or a vision that transcends opposition between life and death (5.15a, 
21a). Leader of the people, the saint enables the people to “follow their own nature” 
(io.9a-b, 29a, 31b). 

In conclusion, Wang Pang, who remains above all a scholar, has created an in- 
telligent synthesis of the Three Teachings. It seems that his commentary exerted an 
important influence on Su Che If ft (see 691 Daode zhenjing zhu). 

Isabelle Robinct 




[ 646 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 

Daode zhenjing zhu jll W. $5 If 

4 juan 

By Su Che iioo 

691 (fasc. 374) 

“Commentary on the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” Some of the Song 
editions of this commentary by Su Che were divided into two juan (VDL 107) and 
are said to date from 1100 (see Daode zhenjing jiyi dazhi 1.9b). There were two editions 
printed in the thirteenth century that are no longer extant: one written in the calligra- 
phy of Zhang Jizhi^i IP in 1218 (d.Songrenzhuanjiziliaosuoyinf^. A IU IE IS 14^31 
2398), the other produced in 1255 in Sichuan by the Taoist master Wang Daoli 
Boxiu and revised by his grandson in 1290 (see Bisong lou cangshu zhi 66.3a). 

In this commentary, Su Che seeks to illustrate the fundamental unity linking Tao- 
ism, Confucianism, and Buddhism. In a postface, dated 1108, he states that it was in 
order to prove to a Buddhist monk that the teachings of Confucianism were akin to 
those of Buddhism that he had undertaken to write this commentary on the Laozi. 
A more complete version of this postface is preserved in other editions. The present 
commentary is indeed particularly characterized by its Buddhist-oriented approach. 
Almost all the references to the Confucian classics are to the Tijing , on which Su Che 
wrote a separate commentary. 

The dominant concept of the present work is fuxing jj|ft (return to one’s own 
nature). This expression, associated with the Tiantai school Buddhism, had already 
enjoyed a long history in both Confucianism and in Taoism, but Su Che gives it un- 
usual prominence. 

Like the Neo-Confocians and Wang Pang ( 706 Daode zhenjing jizhu 5.15a), Su 
Che uses a statement from the Book of Changes as a formula epitomizing individual 
asceticism: “By exploring the order of the world to its limits and examining their own 
nature, they arrived at [an understanding of] the decree [of Heaven]” (qiongli jinxing 
yi zhiyu ming I^fSiift ; Tijing, “Shuo gua” 1). In this way the expression 

fuxing connects with fuming (Mon (to restore the decree of Heaven) and a Buddhist 
concept can be linked to the Tijing (see the commentary to chapter 16, i.i9a-b). 

Xing ft is the ultimate reality, understood with the transcendental connotation that 
Buddhism attaches to it. It is the seat of the Tao in humanity (1.10a), so vast that it 
fills all Heaven and Earth; neither life nor death have power to alter it, nor can they in 
any way increase or diminish it (1.14b). Xing is also the primary source through which 
the senses experience the world and whence all beings originate (1.15a; 2.4a). Xing is 
attained not by a quietism leading to the immobility of “withered wood” but by a 
kind of immobility, a quiescence, that is radiant action (i.i7b-i8a). Ming np (decree 
of Heaven) is the miao & transcendent, the wondrous aspect of xing. Xing remains in 
the realm of the word; ming transcends the word (1.19a). 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 647 ] 

On various occasions, Su Che makes a distinction between the metaphysical world 
and the world of forms (xing). The former is that of the immeasurable, ineffable Tao 
(2.12a, 4.10b), where there is neither negation ( wu $fi) nor affirmation (you ft); the 
latter is that which can be spoken of and measured (1.2a, 7b, 12b), that which encom- 
passes Heaven and Earth “beyond the ten thousand beings” yet is finite (1.20a) and 
not self-engendered (1.8a). 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing jie £§ R £5 ft? 

2 juan 

By Chen Xianggu f>]| ft ; preface 1101 

683 (fasc. 364) 

“Explication of the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” The present com- 
mentary on the Daode jing has a short preface dated 1101. The author was “gendeman 
of discussion” ( chengyi lang zp:ffiJ![ 5 ) at Song Huizong’s (r. 1100-1125) court (see Song 
huiyaojigao 4:3895). The commentary is quoted in 707 Daode zhenjing jizhu by Peng 
Si, and in 710 Daode zhenjing zhushu, corresponding to 2.4b in the present text. 

Chen treats the Laozi as a continuous text, without using the traditional chapter 
divisions. Thus, for instance, on 1.18a the last sentence of chapter 25 is followed directly 
by the first phrase of chapter 26. 

The version of the Daode jing used here shows some textual differences in relation 
to the traditional Heshang gong and Wang Bi editions. For example, the last 
sentences of chapters 48 (here on 2.7b) and 52 (here 2.10a) are lacking. 

Chen’s glosses are short and do not develop any particular system. The explanations 
are sometimes rather original (see, for instance, the commentary on the sentence in 
chapter 13 (here on 1.9a): “If I had no body, how could I suffer?”, which reads: “Only 
when one no longer relies on the fact that one has a body, can the Tao operate its 
mysterious function in the body” 

Isabelle Robinet 

Song Huizong yujie Daode zhenjing ft ® ft? M R £5 

4 juan 

By Emperor Huizong Mft; ca. 1111-1118 

680 (fasc. 359) 

“Imperial Commentary on the True Scripture of the Way and its Power by Song 
Huizong.” This commentary dates from the Zhenghe period (1111-1118). It was en- 
graved on stone and included in the Daozang after 1118 (VDL 105 and 44, note). 

The main references used by Emperor Huizong are the Tijing and the Zhuangzi. 
Huizong punctuates the first sentences of the Laozi after wu and you, following the 




[ 648 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ < 4 p ] 



example of Sima Guang W] ,H it (1019-1086), and, like many commentators, he uses 
a phrase of Zhuangzi as his model. As a result, he places special emphasis on changyou 
and cbangwu (absolute existence and nonexistence), which are parallel 
to zhiwu (the supreme j vu), zhenwu jU)& (the real 1 vu), and micwyou fypjj (the 
transcendent you; 2.1a). This emphasis reveals the persistent influence of Madhyamika 
and the commentators of the Chongxuan school: the wu underlies and encom- 
passes the you, and vice versa. Here, the changwu is associated with li fl (the norm 
of the world), and the cbangyou with shi -(! (the mundane, affaires, i.e., Buddhist 
categories). Other Buddhist influences can be discerned in the text: “return to one’s 
nature” (fuxing e.g., 1.19b, 3.3b); “immobility of beings” (e.g., 1.58,7a); “total 
forgetfulness” or “forgetfulness of contradictions” (e.g., 3.17b, 18a, 18b). The influ- 
ence of Neo-Confucianism can also be seen, for instance, in the distinctions made by 
Huizong between die metaphysical and the physical world (e.g., 1.27a, 2.12b), in a 
leitmotiv borrowed from the Tijing — “to go to the limit of the norm of the world and 
to die extremes of one’s own nature in order to arrive at the decree [of Heaven] — and 
in his discussion on the nonabsolute ( wuji M M ) and the absolute (youji ® ; 

2.11b). 

Isabelle Robinet 

Song Huizong Daode zhenjing jieyi 

10 juan 

Commentary by Zhang An before 1125 

681 (fasc. 360-362) 

“On the Meaning of Song Huizong’s Explication of the True Scripture of the Way 
and its Power.” This subcommentary to the commentary 680 on the Daode jing by 
Huizong (r. 1100-1125) was probably written during the emperor’s lifetime and ad- 
dressed to him personally. It follows the “classical” pattern insofar as it echoes features 
from Guo Xiang’s commentary on the Zbuangzi. 

Zhang An states that the fundamental tenet of the Laozi is to be found in Laozi’s 
doctrine of weakness and nonresistance (10.14a). On several occasions the commen- 
tator affirms that he also is a partisan of nonaction. He returns repeatedly to the 
theme of feiyou feiwu 4 ^ ■M 4 \r M (neither being nor nonbeing) already elaborated by 
the Chongxuan MS school ofDouble Mystery (see 74s Nanhua zhenjmg zhushu ) and 
to the formula that places the Tao in “forgetfulness of the self and of others.” The Tao 
resides in everything, and everyone possesses it within himself. Nature ( xing '[' 4 ) is 
the One (5.13b). The general system of thought underlying this commentary is sum- 
marized as follows: “to go to the very limits of one’s nature and thus reach supreme 
emptiness, forgetful of oneself and others. Those who forget that they have forgotten 
find that their destiny has returned to the Great Beginning (Taichu jxfij). Thus, by 



nonaction they rediscover the substance of the Tao, and since therefore there is noth- 
ing that is not done, they achieve the function of the Tao. At rest, they are saints; in 
action, kings” (7.7b). 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing shuyi jM R il 

14 juan 

By Jiang Zheng '/I®; 

694 (fasc. 378-383) 

“Commentary with Explanations of the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” 
This work, probably written during the lifetime of Emperor Huizong (r. 1100-1125) 
and addressed to him, includes a commentary of the Daode jing by the emperor and a 
subcommentary by Jiang Zheng that repeats Huizong’s commentary and develops it 
phrase by phrase. 

Jiang’s work presents the same themes that are found in the Huizong commentary, 
perhaps most frequendy “neither being nor nonbeing” (feiyou feiwu), influenced by 
the commentators of the Double Mystery (Chongxuan) school: the absolute wu 
is the wu that is not wu, and the absolute you is die you that is not you (1.7a), that 
is to say, the transcendent wu that is the transcendent you, and the you that is the 
real wu. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing zhushu jit dl W f$. IE ©it 

8 juan 

Attributed to Gu Huan (420-483) and others 

710 (fasc. 404-406) 

“Commentaries on the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” This is an anthol- 
og y of twenty-three commentaries on the Daode jing. The editors of the Ming canon 
indicated Gu Huan, Recruit for Office from the Wu Commandery ( Wujun zhengshi 

It ffll ± ), as the compiler. This attribution is plainly mistaken, as the present anthol- 
ogy can date only from the twelfth century at the earliest. The commentaries placed 
under the name of Chen are those of Chen Xianggu Pit ^ (see 683 Daode zhenjing 
jie) that were published in 1101. 

The main commentary, marked zhu |i, is that of Heshang gong; the sub- 
commentary ( shu M) is by Cheng Xuanying. Among the other glosses, the most 
frequendy quoted are (1) the Jiejie commentary by an unknown author, some- 

times identified as Ge Xu an; (2) a subcommentary to that of Heshang gong by 
a certain Wang, who may be identified as Wang Xuanbian , reported to have 

written such a subcommentary at the end of the eighth century (see 725 Daode zhenjing 



[ 6so ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 6s r ] 



guangshengyi 1.3b); (3) a commentary by the above-mentioned Gu Huan; and (4) a 
commentary by Emperor Xuanzong (r. 712-756) of the Tang. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Fujiwara Takao, “Kokan Roshi chuko”; Kusuyama Haruki, Roshi densetsu no kenkyu, 199-238; 
Liu Ts’un-yan, “Lun Daozang ben Gu Huan zhu Laozi xingzhi”; Robinet, Les amimentaires du 
Too to king, 215-19. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing zhijie jilt d H? ill M 

By Shao Ruoyu !§, hew Benlai zi ft ft ft; 1159 

Revised by Zhang Zhixin ‘jM%Q$T,hao Qinghe jushi if MM it 

688 (fasc. 372) 

“Straightforward Explication of the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” This 
commentary has an introduction dated 1159 by Shao Ruoyu, a native of Qiantang ft 

(cf. the biblography of Song commentaries Song jiejing xingshi appended 

to the preface of 707 Daode zhenjing jizhu, 2a). It ends with an epilogue dated 1160, 
signed Chen Yuanqing MftM, which records comments by Shao Ruoyu and states 
that this work had been previously printed. The commentary is accompanied by the 
glosses, usually textual, of Zhang Zhixin. It adopts its own division of the Laozi. Shao 
Ruoyu explains that for him the quintessence of the Daode jing can be summarized 
as: the absence of desire, corresponding to youxuan (multiple mystery) and to 

the four final stages of asceticism in Buddhism, centering on the dialectics of you and 
wu until their ultimate dissolution in neither you If nor wu fffi (neither being nor 
nonbeing). This process, which is presented in the epilogue of the present text, and 
elaborated in the first chapter of the Laozi , corresponds to that of the Chongxuan M 
ft school (see 74S Nanhua zhenjing zhushu). 

Shao Ruoyu chooses quietism and rejects all religious practices. He does however, 
distinguish four steps on the way to the Tao: these steps he links to the four Primal 
Stages of the Liezi (Taiyi X J? , Taichu XW, Taishi Xltn, Taixu XlM), as well as to 
the words in the Laozi, “The Tao gives birth to the One, the One gives birth to the 
Two . . .” The step of the Three is that of “exterior virtue,” and the step of the Two, 
of “interior virtue” and of yin-yang. The step of the One is that of the Breath-of-the- 
One, the primordial qi that is the “uncarved block,” the “empty virtue,” and that is the 
origin of all things. The Breath-of-the-One in humanity is the heart-mind (xin ft), 
which is the name given to all the essential elements contained within the body and 
which characterizes the human being, the hun and po $1 souls, the spirit (shen ft), 
the essence (jing iff ) or real nature (xing ft), and the passions (qing ff ). The fourth 
step is that of youxuan, of xin without xin; it is the ultimate stage of the Tao and the 
Taiyi, the first of the Primal Stages of the Liezi. 



Shao Ruoyu reconciles his interpretation of the Daode jing with the “four verities” 
of the Madhyamika, as well as with Zhongyong ft Iff (the Doctrine of the Mean). 
He cites Mencius and the Analects, but more often the Zhuangzi, the Taoist texts of 
Zhang Boduan, and 620 Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing miaojing. Nonetheless 
his efforts to establish a Three Teachings synthesis remain generally inchoate. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing quanjie )£! St 

2 juan 

Attributed to Shi Yong BvFlU, hao Xiaoyao Mill; preface 1159 

696 (fasc. 385-386) 

“Full Explication of the Daode jing.” The preface, dated 1159, is signed by Shi Yong 
of the Jin dynasty (1115-1234), residing at Bo Ig, the birthplace of Laozi. The author 
recounts that he received an anonymous manuscript bearing this title from Xi Quhua 
and that he had it printed. The Daozang editors attributed the work to Shi 

himself. 

Throughout the commentary, the author makes a distinction between the absolute 
Way, that of Heaven, and the Way of Earth. The absolute Tao is the state of fusion of 
yin, yang, and harmony— in other words, the state of Primordial Chaos. From this 
One are born yin and yang as well as Heaven and Earth. The One is the Absolute 
Name. The Tao of Heaven is without body, without desire, without action; it is the 
way of the Spirit and of the yang containing the yin. 

The Tao of Earth is immobility and quiescence; it is the way of qi and of the yin 
containing the yang. The union of the Tao of Heaven and of Earth in humanity 
produces the harmony of the center. To incorporate the Tao of Heaven is to govern 
without action; to incorporate the Tao of Earth is to become female and concentrate 
qi; to incorporate die absolute Tao is to attain the state of primordial chaos and non- 
cognition, which comprises all things. 

The you ft is defined as matter (xing Jfj) and the wu 4£ as spirit (shen ft); these 
definitions are similar to the interpretation Zhu Xi (1130-1200) gives these 
terms: both are perfectly complementary. 

Xuan ft is black blended with red (corresponding to the trigrams qian $£ and 
kun ft ). The second xuan in chapter 1 of the Laozi lies in the heaven Dafan X 5 fc (the 
supreme Heaven, according to certain Taoist texts) and governs die celestial palaces 
of the brain and heart (niwan ft ft mdjianggong fslft ), as well as the five qi and the 
one hundred spirits of the universe. Indeed, on several occasions our author uses terms 
and notions that are specifically Taoist: the Primordial Chaos results from the fusion 
of the essence (jing fjf), breath (qi Hi), and spirit (shen ft); mention is also made of 
the Southern Palace and the Capital of Mystery. 




[ 6$2 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 6s3 ] 



The second juan has been reproduced entirely in 700 Daode zhenjing jie, as juan 3 of 
that work. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing jie jilt ft 31 

3 juan 

Probably Southern Song (1127-1279) 

700 (fasc. 388) 

“Explication of the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” The date of this 
anonymous commentary is not known. The last juan has been borrowed from 696 
Daode zhenjing quanjie. The original final part of the present commentary is missing. 

The commentary consists, for the most part, of lengthy reflections, partly mystical 
and partly poetical, on the state of the primordial One, or original chaos prior to dif- 
ferentiation. This is the state of pu ft (the uncarved block) and su ft (undyed silk), the 
“real” state corresponding to the qiwu ’$$1 (the identity of all things) of the Zhuangzi 
where there is neither image, nor sound, nor movement (wuqian M'M, a term with 
Buddhist connotations), where xing ft (nature) is undivided. Since it represents in 
humanity a state both primordial and ultimate, to which one must “return,” the notion 
of xing here is quite central. 

The notions of ti ff (substance) and yong ff| (function) are used to distinguish 
between, “absence”— or the transcendence of the Tao (which is nowhere), correspond- 
ing to the Void, to spontaneity, to the One, and to xing— and “presence”— or the im- 
manence of the Tao (which is everywhere), corresponding to the original separation 
and dispersal into movement and action. 

With the frequent use made of the notions of yin and yang, and in one instance of 
Inner Alchemy (1.16b: the “River Chariot” “Purple Chamber,” and “stove”), this com- 
mentary displays a slight tinge ofTaoism despite the fact that the term ming a\ ? (decree) 
is given a completely different significance from the one given to it in Inner Alchemy: 
in our text it is related to wu or nonbeing and contrasted with form {xing; 1.18b). 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing qushan ji Hi R it M 

12 juan 

By Li Lin ft U', zi Zongfu ft fH , Hermit of Raoyang [?§ ; preface 1172 

718 (fasc. 424-427) 

“Select Anthology of Daode jing Commentaries.” This anthology contains an undat- 
ed preface by Li Lin, written in his later years, and a second preface by Liu Yunsheng §?!) 
dated 1172, according to which the work was divided into six juan and printed. 

The anthology joins together fifty-four authors from different periods. The most 



frequently quoted are Emperor Huizong (r. 1100-1125) of the Song and Wan g Pan g . 
The eclectic selection includes, in addition to the commentaries of Wang Bi and 
Heshang gong, several commentaries belonging to the Chongxuan MS school, 
some of which are now lost. Among these are the commentaries by Sun Deng , 
Zang Xuanjing jicSff , Liu Jinxi -i 1 ] jjt H , Cheng Xuanying, Cai Zihuang Hft 
%, and Li Rong ft The anthology also contains extracts from other lost commen- 
taries, such as the one attributed to Kumarajlva (344-413). Certain commentaries date 
back to the Jin (265-420) and the Sui (581-618) dynasties, for example those by Zhong 
Hui 81 # and theTaoists Gu Huan, Tao Hong jing, and Pei Chuen HM® (on 
the latter, see 72s Daode zhenjing guangsheng yi, preface, 3a). Other texts date from the 
Tang (618-907) and Song (960-1279), such as those by Che Huibi ft M fflj, the Taoist 
Zhang Junxiang (1254-1322), Wu Yun, Sima Guang WJIDfc (1019-1086), 

Liu Zhongping <§l] ft (who signs his name Liu Ji If in 707 Daode zhenjing zhu), 
Lu Dian HifEfl (under the name ofLu Nongshi IS §ffi in 724 Daode zhenjing jiyi), Li 

Tian ft Bft Lu Jifu S ft ft (i.e.,Lu Huiqing; cf. 686 Daode zhenjing zhuan ) , and the 
female Taoist Cao Daochong # ft (cf. 707 Daode zhenjing jizhu, preface, 7b). The 
date of the commentary by the Immortal from Songling fell ft A is unknown (cf. 72s 
Daode zhenjing guangsheng yi, preface, 3a). There are also a half dozen commentaries 
that are completely unknown and not mentioned elsewhere; among these, the most 
quoted in our text are those by She Wang ft and Ma Juji ft ft . The quotations 
from Lii Jifu are often at variance with 686 Zhenjing zhuan. The remaining quotations 
accord on the whole rather well with this text. 

Throughout the present text, which is divided into the traditional chapters of the 
Daode jing, Li Lin adds his own personal commentary to each of the commentaries 
he has chosen. He reveals a tendency toward Quanzhen ft |J! Taoism, especially in 
relation to Inner Alchemy. He states that he who attains the Tao is a Quanzhen per- 
son who perfects his essence (jing fjf), his breath (qi) and his spirit (shen ft). This 
statement is an explicit reference to the works on Inner Alchemy mentioned in 2.11a. 
However, Li Lin’s concepts are his own : jing is the prime element and carries a cos- 
mological meaning; sublimation seems to occur from the jing to the shen without the 
qi playing an important part (cf. 6.i4a-b). On the other hand, the jing is the basis of 
xing 'ft (real nature) in contrast to the qi (which in this context is cosmological). The 
qi is the basis of the body (xing) ; indeed the jing sometimes forms one common entity 
with the spirit (jingshen ft ft ) as described in the Huainan zi. 

Our text ends with a brief Essay on the Unifying Coalescence of the Tao and the 
De, where Li Lin insists on the fundamental unity of the Tao “prior to forms,” and of 
the De ft “after the appearance of forms.” Quoting Sima Guang, he seems to decry 
the division of the Daode jing into two distinct books. 



Isabelle Robinet 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 6ss ] 



[ 6$4 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 

Daode zhenjing sizi gudao jijie 

io juan 

By Kou Caizhi preface dated 1179, postface dated 1180 

684 (fasc. 365-67) 

“Collected Explications of the Ancient Teachings of the Four Masters on the Daode 
zhenjing .” The original tide of the work, as stated in the author’s preface and in the 
postface by Liu E $1 If of Fanzhi 8# (Shanxi), was Sizigudaoyi 0 jit H (Inter- 
pretations according to the Ancient Teachings of the Four Masters). 

Neither preface nor postface contain much factual information on the identity of 
Kou Caizhi. Apparently, he also authored a Jingshi shu USSfcM in ten juan, which was 
lost by the time the Siku quanshu was compiled. 

Kou describes himself as an obscure rustic who spent his early manhood indulging 
in simple pleasures. He first studied works on neidan f*| and divination. Only at a 
later age did he discover the ancient Taoist works and their commentaries. Frustrated 
with the way lecturers on the Tao all seemed to ignore the basis of Laozi’s teachings 
and to restrict themselves to theories relating to kongxing ( sunydta ), Kou decided 

to elucidate his own understanding of the Daode jing, drawing solely upon material 
culled from the works of the four masters that both Kou and Liu E considered to be 
the direct disciples of Laozi: the Nanhuajing (Zhuangzi), Chongxujing 

|M (Liezi), Tongxuanjing jilSff (Wenzi) and Dongling jing (attributed to 

Gengsang Chu). The present text has been preserved only in the Dcwzang. 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 

Daode zhenjing jizhu iM 01 IS HI li 

18 juan 

By Peng Si hao Helin zhenyi jiH; preface dated 1229 

707 (fasc. 398-402) 

Daode zhenjing jizhu shiwen M lli B IS II If 

1 + 21 fols. 

708 (fasc. 403) 

Daode zhenjing jizhu zashuo 

2 juan 

709 (fasc. 403) 

These three works by Peng Si, disciple of Bo Yuchan, are complementary. The 
preface to 707 Daode zhenjing jizhu (An Annotated Anthology of the Commentaries 
on the Daode jing) is dated 1229 and signed by Peng Si. In a preface missing from 
the Yiwen edition of the Daozang but present in both the Commercial Press edition 



and Daozang jiyao, “Xin 'L'” 6.1, Peng Si presents himself as the successor to Chen 
Jingyuan (1025-1094). 

The commentaries included in 707 Zhenjing jizhu do not reflect Peng’s predilec- 
tion for alchemy. The compiler does not cite his own master, although Bo Yuchan 
also wrote a commentary on the Laozi. Twelve of the score of authors Peng does cite 
have much fuller versions of the commentaries in 724 Daode zhenjing jiyi. Most of 
these commentaries date from the Song (960-1279), and apart from those by Chen 
Jingyuan, Sima Guang i 0 ^ 7 fc (1019-1086), Su Che MW (see 691 Daode zhenjing 
zhu ), and Chen Xianggu the majority are lost. The commentaries by Li 

Wenhe P and Lin Dong are found exclusively in the present work. 

The 708 Daode zhenjing jizhu shiwen is a philological study of the Laozi in which 
Peng Si compares textual variations and glosses, relying to a large extent upon Lu 
Deming (ca. 550-630) and Chen Jingyuan, and includes data taken from 

707 Zhenjing jizhu. 

The 709 Daode zhenjing jizhu zashuo offers “Various Observations” as an addition 
to the anthology 707 Zhenjing jizhu and reports instances where the Laozi was quoted, 
often by emperors, going back as far as the Han. It provides information about 
certain commentaries or anthologies of commentaries, occasionally quoting from 
them. There is interesting information to be gathered from these observations. For 
instance, the mention of a lost catalogue of the Daozang that describes the contents of 
the anthology by Zhang Daoxiang UMilfffi (also known as Zhang Junxiang 
1254-1322), now no longer extant, adds another fragment to the case history of that 
controversial matter (i.2a-3a). 

The author’s various sources are nearly always indicated: official dynastic histories, 
local gazetteers, literary works, and commentaries. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing jijie iS Jl I? KS M 

4 juan 

By Zhao Bingwen (fl. 1185-1232) 

695 (fasc. 384-385) 

“Collection of Commentaries on the Daode jing.” This work is attributed to Scholar 
Zhao (Zhao xueshi 'Pi). This appellation is identified by the Guiqian zhi 1.5-6 and 
9.97-98 with Zhao Bingwen, who was named academician in 1217 (his biography 
appears in the Jinshi 110.2426-29). Zhao was the author of numerous commentaries 
on the classics. Oddly, however, this collection includes individual commentaries at- 
tributed by name to Zhao Bingwen; his name is not placed at the beginning or end of 
individual commentaries as is customary for the authors of compilations. 




[ 6 s 6 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 6 S 7 ] 



The collection consists of seventeen commentaries by different authors, including 
extracts assigned to Kumarajlva (344-413) and Sengzhao MSI (374-414). The first 
anonymous sentences of each commentary are in fact taken from the commentary by 
Su Che 691 Daode zhenjing zbu. The commentaries given under the name Juji 

are by Liu Juji PJ of the Song (960-1279; 723 Daode zhenjing jiyi dazhi 1.10a; cf. 
our text 1.12b with 724 Daode zhenjing jiyi 20.11a). Those attributed to Lu are by Lu 
Xisheng |$i # I? (compare the present text i.ioab with 68 s Daode zhenjing zhuan 1.5b). 
The commentaries attributed to Ye are by Ye Mengde HIR# (1077-1148; compare 
the present text 2.3a-b with 707 Daode zhenjing jizhu 6.4b), the author of various com- 
mentaries on the classics. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing jijie 

4 juan 

By Dong Sijing ltS)tpt; preface dated 1246 

705 (fasc. 393 - 39 +) 

“Anthology of Explications of the Daode jing.” A long preface by the author pre- 
cedes this work. A list of commentators on the Laozi is given here (i.2b-4a), drawn in 
part from the preface by Du Guangting to 72s Daode zhenjing guangsheng yi. Added 
to this list is a good deal of valuable information concerning subsequent commentaries 
and the number of characters contained in the various editions of the Daode jing. 

Our anthology ends with postfaces. One is signed Xie Zhi Hf. 31 ; and dated to the 
Baoyou period (1253-1259; the cyclical dates given in die text appear to be erroneous); 
the other is signed by Huang Bichang j# $ H , zi Jingfii -gt S£, and dated 1257. The 
latter was a scholar from Quanzhou, the native place of Dong Sijing. 

A reedition of this commentary in the Shiwanjuan lou congshu — 

revised and corrected by Liu Ruoyuan §?lj $3 , zi Yuanran ifft ffl , with apparently only 
minor typographical differences in the text— carries a preface by Lu Xinyuan 

(1834—1893)- 

This commentary is also quoted in 712 Daode zhenjing jiyi (e.g., 1.5b, 10a), under the 
name of Dong Sijing, with the variant character Iff. 

Despite its title, the book is not really a “collection” of commentaries. The author 
limits himself to quoting a number of commentators, among them, in particular, 
Su Che Hit (referred to by his zi Wending i/£), Zhu Xi (1130-1200), Sima 
Guang (1019—1086), and the emperor Huizong (r. 1100-1125), as well as some 

authors known from other compilations whose works have not survived indepen- 
dently. Dong Sijing also discusses the various interpretations given to certain passages 
or phrases (particularly i.3b-4b, ioa-nb, i6a-i8a, and 3.2oa-2ib). He provides an 



account of interpretations of the Daode jing in terms of Taoist practices going beyond 
the commentaries themselves. 

A major place, however, is devoted to his own interpretations. On two occasions the 
author sums up the meaning of the Daode jing in a few formulas: ataraxy, nonaction, 
spontaneity, responding to events with the Void, noncompetitiveness (preface, 4a, 
7a). For him the Tao is everywhere and therefore immanent, yet at the same time it is 
transcendent since it is “beyond and anterior to all things.” The Tao is the “substance” 
of which qi is the “function.” The Tao is indefinable (nameless) and metaphysical; qi 
is definable (named) and physical. Tao and qi do not exist one without the other, and 
they share the same origin (ib, 3a, 4a)- Chapter 3 of the Laozi, according to the author, 
deals with “the substance and function of the Tao” and “the yin and yang of qi.” The 
Spirit of the Valley is a term that stems from li M (principle), which is empty; the 
“obscure female” denotes yin and yang and originates from qi; “Heaven and Earth ” 
in the same paragraph, belong to the world of matter. 

This is a work that assembles commentaries based on purely Taoist interpretations 
of the Laozi and at the same time borrows heavily from Neo-Confucian concepts. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing cangshi zuanwei kaiti kewen shu 

5 juan 

By Xue Zhixuan Yongqi fHW,hao Taixia laoren ft 4 - A ; prefaces 

1249 

715 (fasc. 420-421) 

Daode zhenjing cangshi zuanwei shouchao 

2 juan 

716 (fasc. 421) 

This commentary on Chen Jingyuan’s commentary on the Daode jing (714 
Daode zhenjing cangshi zuanwei pian) is divided into two parts: 71s Kaiti kewen shu 
(An Analysis of the Introduction) and 716 Shouchao (A Hand Copy). The author of 
both parts is Xue Zhixuan (see the prefaces to the first of the present texts and to 114 
Zuanwei pian, 1.11a). 

The first part, 7/5 Kewen shu, is preceded by three prefaces— signed by Li Ting 
g§ from Fuyang by Guo Shizhong fflHf ^ (dated 1249), and by Feng Fu M'iM. 
(of the same year)— that state that both parts had been printed. It deals in the main 
with the mythology concerning Laozi, his birth and reincarnations. It includes a long 
biography of Chen Jingyuan (i.3b-8b). 



[ 6sS ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 6S9 ] 



The second part, 716 Shouchao, refers almost entirely to the many quotations from 
the classics made by Chen Jingyuan in his commentary and gives their sources. It 
contains only the second half of the Daode jing, namely the Dejing , as the first half is 
missing. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing kouyi jtM fit R US P i§ 

4 juan 

By Lin Xiyi hew Juanzhai 1261 

701 (fasc. 389) 

“Oral Explanations of the Daode jing.” Lin Xiyi also wrote commentaries on the 
Zhuangzi and the Liezi. The present work was printed in Fujian in 1261, together with 
the latter. The original edition in two juan was frequently reprinted but seems no 
longer extant. 

Perhaps because of its “oral” nature, the commentary is clear and simple. It pro- 
ceeds from chapter to chapter, analyzing each sentence in turn and often providing a 
summary at the end of a chapter. The passages on the art of government are interpreted 
as metaphors on the art of self-conduct. There is no mystical terminology. There are 
a number of comparisons widi Neo-Confucian themes and with terms used in the 
Tijing and the Zhuangzi. Particular account is taken of the language of the Laozi , 
which for the most part is deemed metaphorical or deliberately paradoxical and is on 
many occasions compared to the language of the Zhuangzi. Lin Xiyi examines the 
special meaning that, in his view, the Laozi gives to words and then suggests that the 
Laozi and the Zhuangzi can be read only by applying criteria and values that are differ- 
ent from those appropriate to Confucian texts. He also takes into consideration what 
he calls Laozi’s rhetorical style and sometimes situates the Laozi within the general 
context of Chinese culture in order to attenuate the paradoxes or lessen their novelty. 
He summarizes the whole system of the Laozi as “knowing how to be full and empty,” 
“have and have not” or as “being” (• you ) and “not being” (wu ), that he calls “to 

preserve the feminine and the black.” He returns often to the need to have a heart-mind 
that is nonoccupied. 

On the whole, this is a kind of translation of the Laozi that effaces the difficulties 
of the thought and of the text, as it also obliterates its riches. 

Isabelle Robinet 



Daode zhenjing yijie ifi tH B H? Jt 

4 juan 

By Xizhai daoren M A 

721 (fasc. 429-430) 

“Explications of the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” The Tuan shiyiwen 
zhi, 5:41-42, mentions two Xizhai daoren as authors of a Laozi jie. One is Li Rong ^ 
% ( Laozi jie in four juan), the other Li Kan (Laozi jie in two juan). 

Li Rong, zi Jiamou was a Taoist master who also commented on 3 Tuanshi 
shuo xiantian daode jing zhujie in the Baoyou period (1253—1259). The inspiration and 
the references that characterize that work are very different from those dominating the 
present commentary. This work 3 Daode jing zhujie has definite particularities, among 
them a theory of primordial origins and precise references to Inner Alchemy, as well 
as a propensity to make comparisons with Buddhism. The references in our text, by 
contrast, are mosdy to the Confucian classics and especially to the Mengzi. It is true 
that Chinese authors frequently change the tenor of their writing as they comment 
on different works, but in this case the commentaries are on quite similar texts. In 
the commentary on Laozi 25, for instance, there is, surprisingly, none of the mystery 
of the origin that pervades 3 Daode jing zhujie', on the other hand, the rare references 
made in the latter to the Mengzi reflect none of the observations made in the present 
commentary. 

Indeed, our commentator, to judge by his references to Confucianism and his ten- 
dency to use the term li M in the sense of “ultimate truth” can probably be identified 
as Li Kan. Li Kan (fl. 1312), zi Zhong Bin \$%, posthumous name Wen Jian jCWl, 
was born in Ji Qiu ®] fr[$ . He was also the author of a Zhupu xiangji ftl# M in one 
juan. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode huiyuan iff jUfT/C 
2 juan 

By Li Daochun ^ j! $i,hao Qing’an j# $£ ; Yingchan zi H -f ; preface 
dated 1290 
699 (fasc. 387) 

“Return to the Source of the Meaning of the Daode jing.” The author states that 
having read Bo Yuchan’s commentary to the Laozi, he felt he should write his own, 
He reproaches the previous commentators for having developed a particular view- 
point, be it theoretical, alchemical, or other, whereas his own explanation wells uf 
from the very source of the spirit of the work and tends to give a global interpretation 
while stressing the link that unites the different chapters. 



[ 660 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 661 ] 



The present commentary is divided into three parts: a literal gloss of the text, 
sentence by sentence; a commentary at the end of each chapter explaining its general 
meaning; and, also for each chapter, a poem in the Chan Buddhist style. 

According to the preface, Li Daochun adopted the Heshang gong version 
of the text of the Daode jing. He furthermore compares this edition with two others, 
including Bo Yuchan’s commentary, now preserved in the Taishang daode baozhang 
yi A A (It H? ^ II {Daozang jiyao, “Xin A'” 3-4). He considers the latter to be the 
best edition. Li discusses the variants between die three editions in his introduction 
(xuli ft ft IJ). 

Li Daoch un transmitted the Daode huiymn to Zhao Daoke jfgilf hf, hao Dingan 
who was one of his closest disciples (cf. 1060 Qjng’an Yingchan ziyulu 2.1a). A 
Yuan edition of the present work, dated 1350, is preserved at the Sichuan Provincial 
Library (see Yan Lingfeng, Zhou Qin Han Wei zhuzi zhijian shumu , 1:138) 

Catherine Despeux 

Daode zhenjing san jie l i R $5 H (W 

4 juan 

By Deng Yi jap If , hao Yubin zi 3 £ H -p ; preface 1298 

687 (fasc. 370-371) 

‘Three Explications of the Daode jing These explications are preceded by four 
introductory texts, including a preface by the author, dated 1298. One of these four 
texts is a genealogical presentation of the transmission of Inner Alchemy; this text was 
originally a separate work entitled Dadao zhengtong A xl IE lit (Authentic Transmis- 
sion of the Supreme Tao) written by Xiao Tingzhi disciple of Peng Si and 

author of juan 9-13 of 263 Xiuzhen shishu. In this latter text, which was printed by the 
author in 1260, he describes Zhongli Quan and Lu Dongbin as the masters 
of Haichan zi (Liu Cao Mfi), from whom the two schools of Zhang 

Boduan and Wang Zhe are said to have descended. Another of the introductory 
essays, the Dadao lishu AUtMlfc (Chronicle of the Great Tao), bears the signature 
Qingcheng zhenren AMR A (the zhenren of the Green City), who may possibly be 
identified as Zhang Yun ' 1 MM (635-745; cf. 78iXuanpin lu 5.6a). 

Throughout this commentary there are three levels of explanation. The first level, 
the. jing which explains the text itself. The second level explains the Tao xl from 

an overall point of view often related to cosmology or based on general practices. This 
level includes frequent allusions to the Yijing-, for example, the thirty spokes around 
the hub of the wheel ( Laozi 11) symbolize the twenty-eight stars around the Pole Star, 
and the doors and windows of a room symbolize the sun and moon. The third level 
refers to the practices of the De ID, for the most part alchemical exercises, with fre- 
quent references to Zhang Boduan and Lu Dongbin. The phrase “the Tao gives 



birth to the One, which gives birth to the Two” ( Laozi 42) is explained on the level 
of the Tao as meaning that the One, the Great Ultimate Taiji, has given birth to the 
Two (the Four Emblems), which have given birth to the Three (the Eight Trigrams). 
Explained on the level of the De, however, the reference is to the Void that gave birth 
to the two qi that gave birth to nature {xing 14 ). Deng’s interpretation of Laozi 50 gives 
rise, on the level of the Tao, to speculation about cosmic numbers, with reference to 
Shao Yong; on the level of the De, he offers an alchemical interpretation. “Know 
the male but preserve the female” ( Laozi 28) means, on the level of the Tao, knowing 
that the hexagram qian lji£ represents the Great Beginning, and kun 14 the Comple- 
tion, while on the level of the De it signifies the ascendancy of mercury over lead and 
of wood over metal. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing jiyi dazhi ilt SI) R 15 ifi ii A p 

3 juan 

By Liu Weiyong fJIfzk, Ding Yidong Tlzi A, and others; 1299 

723 (fasc. 431) 

Daode zhenjing jiyi jilt R Ifl 

17 juan 

By Liu Weiyong jgjft/k, Ding Yidong T#jA,and others; 1299 

724 (fasc. 432-439) 

The 723 Daode jing dazhi (General Purport of the Anthology of Commentaries on 
the Daode jing) contains various prefaces and diagrams and, as the title indicates, serves 
as an introduction to 724 Daode zhenjing jiyi , the anthology proper. 

The first nine pages of 723 Jiyi dazhi are devoted to diagrams illustrating phrases 
from the Laozi in terms of cosmology and Taoist techniques (fig. 1). Thus the Spirit of 
the Valley ( Laozi 6) is described as designating the abode where the spirits of the vis- 
cera are hidden; the thirty spokes of the wheel {Laozi 11) correspond to the number of 
the viscera (1.1b); the Mysterious Female {Laozi 6) denotes the left and right kidneys. 
The diagram on i.8b-9a is also found in 688 Daode zhenjing zhijie (preface, 6b). 

Although 723 Jiyi dazhi provides a list of the eighty-one authors cited in the anthol- 
ogy (i.9b-i2b), it also gives the number as seventy-eight (3.26a-26b), and sometimes 
provides the date of the commentaries, most of which belong to the Song (960-1279) 
and Yuan (1279-1368) dynasties. The passages from these commentaries were selected 
from earlier anthologies. The prefaces {723 Jiyi dazhi, from 1.12b to the end) are the 
same as those preceding the commentaries in the anthology 724 Zhenjing jiyi. Intro- 
ductions also taken from the commentaries are found in 723 Jiyi dazhi 2.ia-3.2ib. They 
include one by Wang Yuanze (i.e., Wang Pang) that is missing from 706 



[ 662 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 663 ] 



Dcwde zhenjing jizhu, although the latter work contains the 
most extensive extant extracts from his commentary. 

723 Jiyi dazbi 3.2ib-27a contains a number of colophons 
or postfaces dating from the end of the thirteenth century, 
signed by Yang Ke (1296), Liu Weiyong (1299), Su 
Qiweng Yu Qingzhong Hfjj# ft, and by the Heav- 
enly Master Zhang Yucai (1300). Liu Weiyong 

explains that his anthology and that of Ding Yidong were 
amalgamated. Ding’s commentary is included in our anthol- 
ogy under the name of Shitan ftjf . Yu Qingzhong, in his 
postface, mentions the “new edition” of this commentary, 
which included his own commentary, in collaboration with 
his master Ding Yidong. 

The anthology 724 Zhenjing jiyi originally comprised a 
total of thirty-one juan, of which only the first seventeen 
remain. It now ends at chapter 11 of the Laozi; the first four 
chapters of the anthology are devoted to chapter 1 of the 
Daode jing. The commentators are presented in 724. Zhenjing 
jiyi more or less in the same order as the fist given in the 
introduction ( 723 Jiyi dazbi i.9a-nb). Quotations of the com- 
mentaries are in extenso. The commentary by Wang Yuanze 
in our anthology is much more complete than the text given 
in 706 Daode zhenjing jizhu. Each chapter 0(724 Zhenjing jiyi ends with a commentary 
by Shitan. 

Many of the commentaries in 724 Zhenjing jiyi are uniquely preserved here, for ex- 
ample, the commentary by Zhu Xi 4 IS (1130-1200) and several other commentaries 
also found in 707 Dcwde zhenjing jizhu (in eighteen juan), but in much abridged form. 
The latter include a commentary by Wang Anshi ft $ ft (1021-1086) that is otherwise 
lost, as well as numerous commentaries by Taoists: Zhao Shian, whose commen- 
tary dates from 1152 and is the longest in the book; Bo Yuchan (1194-1229); Yang 
Zhiren jfjft' ft (1287), using the vocabulary of Inner Alchemy; and Niu Miaozhuan ft 
& 1 $ (1280). Bo Yuchan’s approach is mystical: “It is I who am the Saint,” he writes; 

“the ten thousand beings become one with me lam Heaven and Earth, Heaven 

and Earth are I” (12.25a). He identifies himself with the cosmos (10.30a); the root of 
the cosmos is xin ft (heart-mind 11.27b). XieTu’nan MMWi (1246) explains the Daode 
jing in terms of the Tijing (11.30b; 12.27a), Zhang Chongying (1253) interprets 

the Laozi in terms of Tending Life and breathing exercises (5b;n.26b,27a;i5.ia). 

Zhao Shian, whose personal name was Daosheng iM and who was known for his 

practice of the Yellow Register Retreat {huanglu zhai SfUjf ;see 219 Lingbao wuliang 



duren shengjing dafa 49.18b; so8 Wushang huanglu dazhai lichengyi 34.4a), distinguish- 
es three possible practices of the Daode jing ( 723 Jiyi dazbi 2.17a): first, following the 
way of wuwei MM or nonaction, which is that of “total forgetfulness” (724 Zhenjing 
jiyi 14.13b); second, using techniques to achieve longevity (see 724 Zhenjing jiyi 7.3b, 
where he states that the Laozi is the origin of methods for attaining longevity); third, 
applying of the Daode jing to government. The Doctrine of the Mean ( Zhongyong 
40 ) is presented as complementary to the Laozi (723 Jiyi dazhi 2.i5a-b), and the 
“flood-like breath” of die Mengzi becomes the principal springboard for techniques 
of longevity. In 724 Zhenjing jiyi, Zhao uses a Neo-Confucian vocabulary (2.ia-b) and 
can be considered a pioneer of the Heart-Mind school (Xinxue ft'^ 1 ): the xin is the 
Tao (13.18b) and the fundamental nonbeing ( benwu 4 )® 14.12b), while the xing ft 
(nature) is the first qi and the Spirit of the Valley (11.13a). Zhao Shian also employs 
Buddhist terminology: zhenwu MM (real nonbeing) and zhenkong (real void; 
2.4a, 9a-b, 19b). He uses the concepts of wu M, and you ft (being and existence) are 
dealt with according to the tenets of the Double Mystery school (Chongxuan lift); 
and he approaches the question concerning gradual or sudden enlightenment in the 
same vein (2.16a, 17a; 5.27a); the negation of negations follows the Madhyamika doc- 
trine (2.16b). Nevertheless, references to Inner Alchemy are also present (2.18b, 19a; 
7.36b; 12.15a). The Spirit of the Valley and the Mysterious Female are interpreted in 
various ways, but always within the framework of breathing techniques (n.i2a-i7b). 

A comparison of all the commentaries in this anthology gives rise to the following 
observations: 

1. A distinction can be made between those commentaries that give precedence to 

xin (heart-mind) or to xing (real nature). For Bo Yuchan, xin is the “root of the 
universe” (11.27b); for Yu Qingzhong, xin existed before the universe (12.34a; see 
also Shao Ruoyu S (5 ^ M , 688 Daode zhenjing jijie 1.12a: the one qi of chaos is the xin 
of humanity). As for the commentaries that give precedence to xing , the text by Chu 
Boxiu states xhztxing is theTaiji 41 ®, the Supreme Pole (11.35a), while in the 

commentary by Xiuxiu an ft 40 , dated 1288, the xing precedes theTaiji (12.30a). 

2. There are two distinct ways of understanding the first chapter of the Daode jing, 

depending on whether it is punctuated before wu and you, or after ming ft (name) 
and yu (desire). To punctuate before wu and you, as does Sima Guang W] H Jt 
(1019-1086; cf. 689 Daode zhenjing lun), is to place emphasis on the changwu and 
changyou ^ ft (the absolute nonbeing and absolute being). Several commentators in 
our anthology follow this interpretation, including Cheng Taizhi ft , an author 
with Confucian leanings (2.32a; commentary dated 1069) ; the Taoist Niu Miaozhuan; 
Lin Juanzhai (i.e., Lin Xiyi; 3.11b; commentary dated 1261); Bo Yuchan 

(3.3a); Su Jingjing (4.7b); Wang Anshi ft^ft (i.i9a-b); Zhao Bingwen |§ 

StJt (4.14a); LuDian P 4 ftH (1.24b); and Liu Zhongping PJf 4 ,z P (i.3ia-b). There are 




figure 1. Projection of 
the Twenty-eight Stellar 
Mansions onto the 
human body (723 1.6a) 




[ 664 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 66s ] 



also differences in the first phrase of the Laozi: some commentators read it as ‘The Tao 
that can be spoken of is not the absolute Tao” while others take it to mean “The Tao 

I speak of is not the ordinary Tao.” 

3. The Mysterious Female is explained either in terms of wu/you (by Lii Jifu g 

i.e., Lu Huiqing, 11.7b— 8a), or as the Void (by Benyian jushi $ — 

±, 11.45b; Wang Pang, 11.9a; Shao Ruoyu, n.i8a-b; Wang Zhiran 
11.18b, commentary dated 1069), or in terms of Tending Life and Inner Alchemy (by 
Heshang gong, n.2a-b; Liu Ji n.na-i2b, commentary dated 1146; Zhao 
Shian, n.i2a-i3b; Zhang Chongying 3 gftif®, 11.41b; and Wu Huanzhong jiJgifj, 
11. 43b). 

4. In chapter 7 of the Daode jing, the sentence “Tt qi bu zisheng” has engendered 
two conflicting interpretations: in one case it is translated “They do not exist for 
themselves,” in another, “They do not exist of themselves.” Advocates of the former 
translation include the emperor Xuanzong, Lu Dian, and Liu Ji; among those who 
prefer the latter translation are Su Che, Huang Maocai ff Be jvf (commentary dated 
1179), and Xue Yongzhai ^ jff If . 

5. A number of commentators believe that the thirty spokes of the wheel, in chapter 

II of the Laozi , symbolize the thirty days of the month (see, e.g., 17.30a, 33b, 35a, 37a); 
others see the figure 30 as the earthly Five Elements multiplied by the celestial Six 
Breaths (i7.24a-b, 38a). 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing yanyi shouchao 

20 juan (juan 1 and 2 are missing) 

By Wang Shouzheng EE^fTE,hao Wufeng Qing’an yishi S if $ ± ; early 

Yuan (1279-1368) 

717 (fasc. 422-24) 

"Daode zhenjing with Elaborations of Its Purport, Copied by Hand.” This work is 
no longer fully extant. The first two juan, corresponding to the first eight Daode jing 
chapters with their commentaries, are lost. The book, attributed to a certain Wang 
Shouzheng (the Pure and Quiet Recluse from the Five Peaks [Wufeng Qing’an yi- 
shi]), is clearly the work of two authors. The yanyi f jj j(§ section, ascribed to Wang 
Shouzheng, offers elucidations on the text of the Daode jing . Each paragraph of yanyi 
is followed by a further explanatory paragraph headed by the character chao %J>, and 
ascribed to a disciple of Wang Shouzheng. An interesting document in this context 
is a preface by Wang Yun If? (d. 1304), the “Laozi yanyi xu •” It relates 

his meeting in 1292 in the capital with an old Taoist master from the Chongyang gong 
SR# IK (one of the leading Quanzhen temples in modern Shaanxi) named Wang, a 
native of Shu, and obviously the real author of our work. As the tide of Wang Yun’s 



preface suggests, the chao sections were later additions to Wang Shouzheng’s original 
Laozi yanyi (see Qiujian xiansheng daquan wenji 42.nb-i2a). 

The sources quoted most often in xhc yanyi sections are the Zhuangzi and the Book 
of Changes. The chao sections, mostly considerably longer than xhc yanyi, draw upon 
a wide variety of sources, including all of the Confucian classics, philosophical works 
such as the Han Fei zi$$^^ and Yang Xiong’s Hit (53 b.c.-a.d. 18) Fay an [£ W, 
historical works such as the Shiji, and more recent commentaries such as Du Guang- 
ting’s 72s Daode zhenjing guangsheng yi. The present text is uniquely preserved in the 
Daozang. 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 

Daode xuanjing yuanzhi H 

4 juan 

By Du Daojian fixii?, zi Chuyi iMM, hao Nangu zi £r -p ; 1305 

702 (fasc. 390) 

“Original Meaning of the Mysterious Scripture of the Tao and the De.” This work 
is introduced by several prefaces, each signed by scholars of the same period. The first 
two prefaces are dated 1305. 

Du Daojian (1237-1318), a native of Dangtu in Anhui, was a Taoist master 
who entered the order at fourteen years of age and later became abbot of several mon- 
asteries, including that of Shengyuan in Huzhou ji8j#| . He also wrote a commentary 
on the Wenzi SCh' and was the master of Li Taiwu . 

He compares the teaching of the Laozi with that of the Tijing. The Spirit of the 
Valley in the Laozi is the Taiji of the Tijing. The Laozi is explained in terms of 
you and wu (existence and nonexistence), and the Tijing in terms of mobility and 
quiescence. The antithesis between wu and you in the Daode jing is illustrated in the 
Tijing by the Taiji, which gives birth to the two principles. For Du Daojian the term 
wuji ftf®, which Zhou Dunyi Jn|i£l§l (1017-1073) associates with the Taiji, does not 
mean “that which has no pole” but instead designates the Supreme Void ( taixu 
that precedes the Taiji. Here our author enters into the controversy surrounding these 
terms and joins the ranks of many Taoists who disagree with Zhu Xi )K (1130-1200). 

Du Daojian punctuates the first phrases of the Laozi after wu and you in the same 
way as Sima Guang 5 ] pp (1019-1086) and interprets the absolute wu as “prior to 
Heaven” ( xiantian fcjj) and the absolute you as the “posterior to Heaven/world of 
phenomena” ( houtian 'i&Jfi). He also supports the theory held by the alchemists that 
xing f4 (nature) and ming np (the physical pole of life) are complementary. 

He joins those who equate the heart-mind (xin) with the Tao in humanity: the 
heart-mind is the root, the pivot of the Tao that existed before Heaven and Earth; to 
be resonant, it must be totally empty, like the valley. 




[ 666 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 667 ] 



The teachings of the Daode jing are addressed to the Superior man (Junzi H f- ) and 
give special importance to the way of the August Ones and to the power of emperors. 
In this text, Du Daojian borrows the Huargjijingshi%jffl$j$L classification used by 
Shao Yong: the Three August Ones, the Five Emperors, the Kings and Hegemons. 
Throughout his commentary, he makes references to the exemplary conduct of Con- 
fiician heroes— Yao, Shun, Yu the Great, etc. —advocating government by nonaction. 
He also adopts the equally Taoist and Confiician precept according to which govern- 
ing one’s own body is on a par with government of the family and of the country. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Xuanjing yuanzhifahui $§? IM m fit 

2 juan 

By Du Daojian f±£il?; 1306 

703 (fasc. 391) 

“Dissertation on the Original Meaning of the Mysterious Scripture.” This text, in 
twelve sections, is a complement to 702 Daode xuanjing yuanzhi, as the tide implies. It 
opens with a preface by the author, dated 1306, followed by two other prefaces: one 
by Huangshi weng (Old Man of the Yellow Stone) and the other, also dated 

1306, by Ren Shilin a disciple of the author. 

As he explains in his preface, Du Daojian proposes to gloss the Laozi with the 
aid of the Huangji jingshi MS MtS by Shao Yong. In the first six sections of our 
text, Du Daojian uses the categories and computations of Shao Yong to recast a 
cosmic chronology that begins with the manifestation of Heaven and continues with 
the Five Greats (of the Laozi). These “greats” are the four beginnings of the Liezi, to 
which the author adds the Taiji, corresponding to chaos in the Liezi. The chronology 
continues, using the same categories as S hao Yong: three times Three August Ones, 
then the Five Emperors, followed by the Kings and Hegemons. His aim seems to be 
to introduce the Taiji into this cosmology. 

The six final sections are devoted to the transmission of the Daode jing and to the 
legend of the reincarnations of Laozi. The last section is an index of key terms of the 
Laozi. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing zhu {IS ill Hi 

4 juan 

By Wu Cheng ^ ?§:, zi Youqing ijj I# , hao Caolu JpLffi (1249-1333) 

704 (fasc. 392-393) 

“Commentary on the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” Wu Cheng is also 
the author of a commentary on the Tijing and of a critical edition of the Zhuangzi 



( 74iNanhua neipian dingzheng). Wu, one of the foremost scholars of the Yuan dynasty 
(1279-1368), was a disciple of Lu Xiangshan (1139-1193). He divides his com- 

mentary into sixty-eight sections, devoting much of his work to textual and philologi- 
cal analyses. 

For Wu Cheng, the essence of the Laozi is that every concept evokes its opposite 
and that these opposites are mutually dependent and even reinforce each other. As- 
serting this opinion (3.12a), he states that the second chapter of the Laozi presents in 
itself a complete summary of the Daode jing (1.5a). Elsewhere he takes the view that 
“to act by nonaction” is equally a major concept in Laozi’s work. The Tao is seen 
as a metaphysical entity. It is the li fl — the “norm” of the thought of Zhu Xi 
(1130-1200) —not yet infused with qi, and it corresponds to the “eternal nonbeing” of 
the Zhuangzi. 

The De, on the other hand, is a physical entity in which li is infused with qi; it cor- 
responds to Taiyi — - (the Great Unity) of the Zhuangzi. This “eternal non-being” 

is designated by Laozi as the “root of Heaven and Earth” and is the “ancestor of the 
original beginning (yuanshi jc$n) of Prior Heaven.” 

The Great Unity is named the Mysterious Female and the Spirit of the Valley and is 
the Primordial Qi and the “source of the Lingbao of Prior Heaven.” It is clear that the 
commentator establishes equivalents between the Laozi , the Zhuangzi, and a number 
of terms associated with religious Taoism. 

The Siku quanshu zongmu tiyao 146 indicates, on what appears to be inconclusive 
evidence, a similarity between this commentary and that of Su Che MW. (q.v.). 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing zhangju xunsong M HI R H! M al II @ 

2 juan 

By Zhang Sicheng (d. 1343); preface dated 1322 

698 (fasc. 387) 

“Admonitory Hymns to the Chapters of the Daode zhenjing .” As Judith Boltz has 
noted (A survey of Taoist literature , 223) this text constitutes the only Daode jing com- 
mentary in the Daozang linked to the Heavenly Master hierarchy. Its author, Zhang 
Sicheng, was the thirty-ninth Zhengyi patriarch. 

Similar to a number of older Taoist masters who had produced exegetical works on 
the Daode jing, Zhang composed the “Admonitory Hymns” mainly because of his frus- 
tration with the widespread ignorance of his contemporaries, including those who con- 
sidered themselves Laozi’s followers, regarding the master’s teachings. As Zhang states 
in his preface, reciting these hymns not only will enhance insight into the true meaning 
of the classic, but also will enable one to cultivate one’s person, regulate the family, 
rule the people, and bring peace to the realm, literally echoing the Confiician Daxue. 




[ 66 S ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 669 ] 



The effects of the recitation described above are, as Zhang concedes, only the 
coarser aspects of the message of the Daodejing. True wisdom must be sought in the 
cultivation ofjindan 

Thirteen of the eighty-one hymns, written in four-, five-, and seven-character 
lines, are enlarged with extra commentary. In this text, one can find elucidations of 
the nature of the Tao in terms of principle (li 3 ), qi, nature (xing ft), and life (ming 
) (1.1b), as well as Zhang’s opinion regarding Heshang gong’s division of the 
original text of the Daodejing into eighty-one chapters (1.19a). 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 

Daode zhenjing zhu illft 31 
2 juan 

By Lin Zhijian ftAM, zi Renzhai ft , hao Xuanmen kaizhen hongjiao da 
zhenren ftFIFiWftlfrft 01 A; preface 1354 
720 (fasc. 429) 

“Commentary on the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” Lin Zhijian, from 
Guanglin (If ft , must have been an important Taoist master at the end of the Yuan 
dynasty (1279-1368). He is not otherwise known. His commentary, which was printed 
during the Yuan dynasty, consists of short sentences taken from the Daodejing itself. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Da Ming Taizu gao huangdi yuzhu Daode zhenjing 
2 juan 

By Emperor Taizu AIM of the Ming dynasty; 1374 
676 (fasc. 354) 

“Imperial Commentary on the Daode jing by Ming Taizu” (see also the entry in 
Ming shi, “Yiwen zhi,” 74.2451). The author states in his preface that this commentary 
on the Daodejing was written in 1374. The Laozi text is presented in an unusual for- 
mat of sixty-seven chapters. It is inspired by the Wu Cheng commentary 704 Daode 
zhenjing zhu, which it follows closely and quotes frequently (the latter consists of 
sixty-eight chapters, of which chapter 65 is not included in the present text). 

Some emphasis is laid upon breathing techniques (cf. the interpretation of the 
Spirit of the Valley; 1.6b and 1.10a) and upon the importance of the mind as the dwell- 
ing place of the souls, the spirit, and the Tao. But this commentary primarily views 
the text in political and governmental terms. The saint governs by peaceful means, 
bringing aid and benefit to all creatures, a phrase that occurs repeatedly. The preface 
strongly opposes any alchemical interpretation of the Daodejing. 

Isabelle Robinet 



Daode zhenjing cijie jEti {§[ R A ft? 

2 juan 

Ming dynasty (1368-1644)? 

697 (fasc. 386) 

“Ordered Explications of the Daode zhenjing .” According to the preface, the impe- 
tus for writing this text was the author’s visit to the Longxing guan II Hi fg (in Sui- 
zhou jj^'jjj, near Yizhou Ur'j'H, south-west of modern Peking). This temple housed a 
stele that carried the texts of the Daojing iff and the Dejing ft ■ If this is the same 
stele as the one from the Longxing guan in Yizhou referred to in Chen Yuan’s Daojia 
jinshi lue (98-99), it would date from the second year of the Jinglong period (708). 
When the author read the text on the stele, he found it to differ substantially from the 
text of the Daodejing current in his own day, occasioning major discrepancies in the 
interpretation. Thereupon he decided to produce a commentary to the classic and to 
systematically note all textual variants found on the stele. These variants (sixty-nine 
instances in the case of the Daojing and seventy for the Dejing) are grouped in two 
different chapters, added to the two parts of the annotated classic. 

In the writing of the commentary, the author claims not to have followed any other 
interpretations, instead forming a school of his own. In reality, some of the explanations 
are rather bland. The value of the Daode zhenjing cijie lies not so much in its qualities 
as commentary as in the fact that it preserves the text of the Longxing guan stele. 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 

Daode zhenjing jiyi jl ft R IS M St 

10 juan 

By Wei Dayou ft Aft; 1387 

712 (fasc. 414-416) 

“Collected Commentaries on the True Scripture of the Way and its Power.” This 
collection of commentaries on the Daodejing is preceded by two prefaces. One is by 
the Heavenly Master Zhang Yuchu and dated 1393, the other, dated 1387, is by the 
author. In the latter, the author states, in agreement with the zhishen zhiguo ft ft IP] 
school of commentaries, that the Daodejing was a text as relevant to self-cultivation as 
to governance. This interpretation explains the choice of commentators in the present 
work, ranging from Heshang gong to contemporaries of the author. This second 
preface ends with a list of the authors included in the collection; to this list should 
be added OuyangXiu W. $§ fl§ (1007-1072; 1.7b), Sima W]|| (4.10a; this is not Sima 
Guang ft ft A), Wang Bi (5.1b and 9.20b), and Emperor Huizong (r. 1100-1125), a 
total of sixteen authors. 

Many of these authors, however, are quoted only in passing. Among the most cited 
authors are Lin Xiyi; Wu Cheng; He Xinshan fnj ft' |Jj , zi Chuyin JllA (fl. 1387); 




[ 670 ] 3. A. 1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 671 ] 



Li Daochun; and Lii Zhizhang S £0^, the author of a Laozi jiangyi ^ T P It in 
twelve juan (VDL 107), of which a sixteenth-century copy is preserved in the National 
Library of Peking. 

He Xinshan frequendy quotes the Zhuangzi, the Liezi, and the Yijing. The expli- 
cations he provides are inspired by Inner Alchemy (i.nb: the husbanding of essence 
and qi, the method of the eruption of the trigram li (H and the filling of kan ; see 
also, e.g., 2.8a. 8.3a). 

The commentary by Lii Zhichang was presented to the throne in 1188. He quotes 
the Xisheng jing (see 666 Xisheng jing and 726 Xisheng jing jizhu ) and the H uangting jing 
(see 332 Taishang huangting waijing yujing and 331 Taishang huangting neijing yujing) 
repeatedly and tends to explain the Laozi in terms of Taoist practice (e.g., 1.4a, 5a, and 
2oa-2ib). 

Isabelle Robinet 

Daode zhenjing song jM Hi flt IS Sf 

13 fols. 

By Jiang Rongan Ming (1368-1644)? 

978 (fasc. 615) 

“Hymns on the Daode jing? Of the otherwise unknown author, the only detail is 
given in his signature: “from Maoshan.” The present collection of eighty-one poems, 
one for each chapter of the Daode jing, has been preserved only in the Daozang. The 
ideas expressed in the four-line, seven-character poems bear no direct relationship to 
the content of the chapters of the book under which they are classified. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Laozi yi ^£- f H 

6 juan 

By Jiao Hong MM, zi Ruohou hao Danyuan MM (1541-1620) 

i486 (fasc. 1115-16) 

“Wings to the Laozi.” This text is by the Ming scholar and bibliophile Jiao Hong 
and is the next to the last work of the supplement Xu Daozang M'MMi, which was 
added to the Zhengtong canon in 1607. To realize the extent to which the original 
work was truncated by the editors of the canon, it is useful to compare the text of the 
Xu Daozang with two other easily accessible versions: the original Wanli print (copied 
into the Daode jing mingzhu xuanji) and the version in the Siku quanshu. 

Both the Wanli and the Siku quanshu editions open with Jiao Hong’s own pref- 
ace, dated 1587, and with a fist of the sixty-four Daode jing commentaries used by 
Jiao in establishing his own critical commentary. Despite the interest of these items, 
they were excluded from the Xu Daozang edition. In the main body of the work as 



found in the Wanli and Siku editions, the text of each Daode jing chapter is followed 
not only by a glossary of terms, but also by abundant quotations from older com- 
mentaries, including the now lost commentary by Shao Bian §[5 # (twelfth century). 
Most numerous are quotations from the writings of Su Che jH$K, Lii Jifii Sp|, 
Li Jiamou ^HH, Lu Xisheng , Wang Yuanze ULjtW (i.e., Wang Pang), 

and Cheng Ju JMifl- In the Am Daozang , however, all this wealth has been reduced to 
quotations from the Su Che commentary, with only one exception, where Lii Jifu is 
quoted. 

Eighteen of the Daode jing chapters also carry Jiao Hong’s own notes ( bicheng if 
iH). Fortunately, in the Xu Daozang these have been retained almost entirely. 

The last two juan of the Laozi yi (corresponding to juan 3 in the Wanli and Siku 
editions) are formed by supplements consisting of quotations from historical, epi- 
graphic, and other sources. These juan deal with the life of Laozi and the history of 
the Daode jing, and they contain chronologically arranged notes on a host of Daode 
jing commentators. Some of these notes concern commentators whose commentaries 
have long been lost, such as Qin Xi 0 % (eighth century). Other commentators, like 
Wu Yun, were included in recognition of brief but remarkable comments they made 
about the Laozi. 

Jiao Hong’s work concludes with observations on textual variants in the Daode jing 
(“Laozi kaoyi ^ -f Jf”), drawing on a dozen or so different redactions of the text, 
including the one on a stele in the Longxing guan ||®H (see 697 Daode zhenjing 
cijie). 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 

3. A. 1 .a.2 The Zhuangzi 

Nanhua zhenjing xinzhuan 31 $$ 

20 juan 

By Wang Pang Yuanze JtM (1044-1076) 

743 (fasc. 503-506) 

Nanhua zhenjing shiyi $) "p 3 ? $?- fn ill 

8 fols. 

744 (fasc. 506) 

“New Exegesis of the Zhuangzi .” The qualification of this commentary as “new” 
may be explained by the fact that the author wrote another commentary to the same 
book in ten juan (see VDL 67), now lost, which is quoted in 734 Nanhua zhenjing yi- 
hai zuanwei 3.7b and 4.12b. The short 744 Nanhua zhenjing shiyi is a supplement that 
is also given, under the title Zashuo , in the appendix of 1487 Zhuangzi yi. 




[ 672 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 673 ] 



Wang was the son of Wang Anshi 1^-5 (1021-1086) and assisted his father in his 
work; he thus attained a great erudition. 

There is an unsigned preface, dated 1096, that explains that the present text was 
found in Sichuan during the years 1075-1085 and thereupon edited and printed. Al- 
though this version claims to be more complete that those current at the time of its 
discovery, the commentary on chapters 7 to 13 is lacking, as well as that on part of 
chapter 22. In a unsigned colophon to the preface, the author says that before him the 
Zhuangzi had never been properly understood. 

The text of the Zhuangzi used here can be identified as the “old manuscript” ( jiuben 
H $) edited by Zhang Junfang and described by Chen Jingyuan in his 737 
Nanhua zhenjing zhangju yushi. 

Wang Pang’s exegesis is not based on philology. His aim is to explain Zhuangzi’s 
thought through the words of Zhuangzi himself, without imposing his own philoso- 
phy. He demonstrates the articulations of Zhuangzi’s thought and analyzes its pro- 
gression from chapter to chapter. At the beginning of each chapter, the link with the 
preceding one is explained. At the end of each chapter, its different parts are discussed. 
The explanations are almost always based on citations from the book itself, confront- 
ing one passage with another, and using only the terminology and the metaphors of 
Zhuangzi himself. Laozi is rarely quoted, and Buddhist or Confucian terminology is 
even less in evidence. There are a few instances where Neo-Confucian terminology is 
used, as well as the concepts of ti fS and yong M (substance and function; see, e.g., 
6.6b and 9b; io.2ob-2ia). The concepts of zhiming npi (to go to the utmost of one’s 

destiny) and jinxing (to examine the core of one’s nature) are often mentioned 

(see, e.g., 4.2b; 6.12a and 18b). The text of the Zhuangzi itself remains, however, the 
basic material on which Wang Pang builds his exegesis. 

There are several characteristic aspects of this exegesis. There is almost no mys- 
ticism, as becomes clear when one examines the way the famous passage on the Fast of 
the Heart and the “whiteness” that rises up from the “empty chamber” are interpreted 
(i.i3b-i4a). On the other hand, the exegesis occasionally evokes Wang Bi (see, for 
instance, 3.1a). The foremost characteristic seems to be the rejection of the body and 
the material world. The body is only a temporal abode (it is merely “borrowed” [wei 
31 ]; 4.12b). The body is “the branch” (3.3b); it should not be “nourished” (3.4a). The 
corporeal principle is the origin of all differences and multiplicity, whereas “forgetting 
the body” allows the practitioner to merge into unity (yi — ; 2.18b, 4.19a) and become 
one with the ten thousand beings (6.2b). Diversity is our lot (Jen jj), whereas unity 
is our natural destiny (ming np), the heavenly order. The material world (xingqi 
H§) and the world of humans Jingshi Iftft) are forever opposed to the Tao. Wang 
Pang considers that Confucianism is limited to the material world (see 734 Nanhua 
zhenjing yihai zuanwei 4.12b). 



Wang Pang uses several expressions and concepts borrowed from Guo Xiang, 
including “spontaneous realization” ( zide § f#; 1.1a; 4.3b), “coincidence” (dang H" ; 
1. 8a; 4.12a), and to “plunge to one’s limit” ( ming qiji jK; e.g., 1.4b; 2.14b). Like 
Guo, Wang emphasizes the attainment of truth and the accomplishment of the self 
through spontaneity (zi § ; 10.23b). Wang reproaches Guo Xiang, however, for 
having reduced the “free wandering” (you jff) of Zhuangzi to a state of simple con- 
tentment with one’s lot (1.1b). In 743 Nanhua zhenjing xinzhuan, Wang frequently 
quotes the expression of Zhuangzi, “Go along with things and let the mind wander 
freely (3.20b; see also 4.16a; 6.2b and 17a). This phrase clearly means 

to him to “wander beyond the material and multiple world.” That is the core of his 
commentary. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Nanhua zhenjing zhangju yinyi j$] "P R 3 ? '&J Je? H 

14 juan 

By Chen Jingyuan W^7t-,hao Bixuzi MlM~. P; 1084 

736 (fasc. 495-96) 

Nanhua zhenjing zhangju yushi [ft ^ ifit $ JO Ij? 

20 fols. 

737 (fasc. 497) 

Nanhua zhenjing yushi zalu [J| §M ^ It 1 $ 

2 juan 

738 (fasc. 497) 

The three works of Chen Jingyuan are philological notes to the Zhuangzi. The 
main text is the 736 Nanhua zhenjing zhangju yinyi (“Phonetic and Semantic Glosses”). 
The two shorter works, the 737 Nanhua zhenjing zhangju yushi (“Additional Notes”) 
and the 738 Nanhua zhenjing yushi zalu (“Miscellaneous Documents”), contain addi- 
tions and complements. 

Chen Jingyuan (1025-1094) compares different editions of the Zhuangzi. His 
basic text is the official Guozi jian edition of 1007. To the printed editions he 

adds eight manuscripts (see the list in 737 Zhangju yushi 20b). One of these manuscripts 
was collated by Xu Lingfu (JWilfif, hao Moxi zi a scholar who lived at the 

end of the ninth century and who wrote a commentary on the Wenzi >f-p (see LZTT 
40.5a). Three other manuscripts contain versions of the Zhuangzi revised by Zhang 
Junfang. Another manuscript is by Liu Deyi — ', who lived at the beginning 

of the eleventh century. Although Chen does not explicidy say so, a good number of 
his glosses are borrowed from the Jingdian shiwen M 1 ft f ? ^ by Lu Deming t]fj 
(556-627). 




[ 674 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 67s ] 



The “additional notes” of 737 Zhangju yushi contain the tables of the divisions that 
Chen Jingyuan made in the book of Zhuangzi. He also lists errors discovered in 
the Guozi jian edition. 

The “miscellaneous documents” of 738 Yushi zalu originally comprised three chap- 
ters on the Gongsun Long zi (see the preface of 763 Zhangju yinyi [2b]). 

Only two of these chapters are preserved in die Daozang version. The commentary in 
738 Yushi zalu is the same as the one found in 1172 Gongsun Long zi i.4b-8a, 2.ia-2b. 
Among these miscellaneous documents, Chen also gives the texts of the prefaces to the 
Zhuangzi by Guo Xiang and by Cheng Xuanying (i.9a-ioa and i.ioa-i2b, re- 
spectively), and the text of the imperial edict conferring official tides on the Zhuangzi 
and the Liezi. Finally, he gives the Jiuzheng xinjie an essay by Yang Sifti J§ 

wljJl dated 827. This essay is based on the Nine Tests (guan H) explained by Kongzi 
in chapter 32 of the Zhuangzi. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Nanhua zhenjing zhiyin $) R $$ B gf 

2 + 12 fols. 

By Jia Shanxiang preface dated 1086 

739 (fasc. 497) 

“Phonetic Gloss of the Zhuangzi.” This text is mentioned under the tide Zhuangzi 
zhiyin in Tongzhi, “Yiwen Hie” 5.3a (VDL 137). In the preface, Jia Shanxiang, 
author of die Gaodao zhuan and other works, states that it was his intention to help 
readers of the Zhuangzi who might not be familiar with some of its more abstruse 
vocabulary. 

The tide of this work suggests that the pronunciation of each character is indicated 
by citing another, homophonous character (zhiyin). This rule is only pardy applied. In 
many instances, the fanqie iJJ method is used in order to provide the pronunciation, 
and sometimes only the tone of the character is given. 

The Nanhua zhenjing zhiyin , which is now found only in the Daozang , has not 
been preserved in its entirety: the text breaks off after die fourteenth Zhuangzi chap- 
ter (“Tianyun In all, more than one thousand characters are provided with 

pronunciation or tone. It should be noted that the present edition is not flawless. A 
number of misprints obstruct the determination of the correct pronunciation. 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 



Nanhua miao 

3 fols. 

Song dynasty (960-1279) 

740 (fasc. 497) 

“Profundities of the Zhuangzi.” The tide of this short work first occurs in small 
characters beneath the tide of the previous work, 739 Nanhua zhenjing zhiyin , to which 
it is appended. The Daozang mulu xiangzhu (3.20a) considers it to be the work of 
Jia Shanxiang, but the present text, which is devoid of preface or colophon, does 
not allow such a conclusion. In the bibliographic chapters of the Song shi (205.5180), 
a Zhuangzi miao idtir'M is mentioned, with Wen Ruhai as the author. Wen 

Ruhai presumably lived in the eighth century and also authored a Zhuangzi zhengyi $£ 
-p jEH in ten juan. Whether Wen Ruhai’s Zhuangzi miao is related to the work now 
found in the Daozang is impossible to ascertain. 

The full text of the Nanhua miao , which offers explanations of the tides of the chap- 
ters of the Zhuangzi , has not been preserved. What remains are explanations to the 
following chapter headings: “Tiandi “Tiandao “Tianyun “Keyi 

MM" (incomplete), “Shuo jian roll and “Yufu $=(5£” Of the explanations to the 
“Lie Yukou M M'M.” chapter, only the tide is left. Apart from the Daozang version, no 
other editions of this text have been transmitted. 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 

Nanhua zhenjing kouyi j^j Ljk (H $$ P It 

32 juan 

By Lin Xiyi ##jH, zi Suweng HH, hao Zhuqi (ca. 1210-ca. 1273); 

postface by Lin Jingde ; dated 1260 

735 (fasc. 488-494) 

“Colloquial Interpretation of the Nanhua Zhenjing .” According to Lin Jingde, 
Lin Xi yi’s aim in writing this text was “to cleanse Guo Xiang’s filth off the Old 

Immortal Nanhua” (“Houxu” i.b; see Guo Xiang). The same postface, moreover, 
explains that Lin Xiyi chose the term kouyi □ H (oral interpretation) in order to 
make clear that literary style was not his main concern in making this commentary. In 
effect, the language Lin uses is simple and unadorned and contains many instances of 
Southern Song vernacular. 

The present version in the Daozang is the oldest edition of our text. A ten-juan 
edition can also be found in the Siku quanshu, under the tide Zhuangzi kouyi. 

Lin Xiyi was first and foremost a Confucian scholar-official, but his Zhuangzi 
commentary betrays a better-than-average knowledge of Buddhism, in particular the 
Chan Buddhist style of discourse. At the same time, and contrary to many of his fellow 
Confucians, Lin’s interpretations reveal a genuine sympathy for the Zhuangzi , as for 




[tf/tf] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 677 ] 



the Daode jing and the Liezi, to which Lin also wrote colloquial interpretations ( 701 
Daode zhenjing kouyi and 729 Chongxu zhide zhenjing Juanzhai kouyi). 

In his own introduction (“Zhuangzi kouyi fati Lin Xiyi elaborates on 

five types of difficulty that obstruct our correct understanding of the Zhuangzi , a 
book that “deserves its place under Heaven despite its not being a Confucian classic” 
(“Fati” i.b). He seems to have regarded Wang Pang’s and Lti Huiqing’s views 
on the Zhuangzi as especially detrimental to the book’s reputation (“Fati,” 2.b). In 
establishing his own commentary, Lin Xiyi draws upon a wide variety of texts and 
commentators, among them the Mengzi igi 1 , the Zhongyong ^0, Han Yu ft .ft 
(768-824), the Vimalakirti-nirdesa sutra, and Lin’s own teacher Chen Zao 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 

Nanhua zhenjing yihai zuanwei 

106 juan 

By Chu Boxiu zi Xueyan HIS! ; preface dated 1265 

734 (fasc. 467-487) 

“Collected Subdeties from the Sea of Meanings of the True Scripture of Southern 
Florescence.” This is a collection of commentaries on the Zhuangzi with an additional 
interpretation by the editor, Chu Boxiu. Chu, who was born in 1230 and must have 
died after 1278, was a native ofWulin 5*)^. In 1246, he met Fan Yuanying /e tcFM —a 
Taoist master from Sichuan, abbot of the Shouning guan on Hengshan 

(JL(, and author of a still extant Laozi daode jing guben jizhu 
?± — during the latter’s stay at the capital. Chu studied the Zhuangzi with Fan during 
two years. Afterward, following his master’s instructions, Chu continued studying by 
himself for seven years; he then compiled the present edition and had it printed. There 
are three prefaces, by Liu Zhensun fljff (1197-1268), Wen Jiweng (A- 1279), 

and Tang Han M'M (ca. 1198-1275), all dated 1265. They are followed by a note (pref- 
ace, 4a-6a) by the editor, which shows that Chu based himself on Chen Jingyuan’s 
edition of major commentaries in 736 Nanhua zhenjing zhangju yinyi (compare also the 
list in Chen’s 737 Nanhua zhenjing zhangju yushi 20b), but he added a number of other 
interpretations. Most of the commentaries listed are, however, quoted only sporadi- 
cally, as is the case of the glosses by Chu’s master Fang Yuanying and by Wang Pan g . 
The commentary by Wang Pang as given here appears, moreover, to be different 
from Wang’s 743 Nanhua zhenjing xinzhuan and may represent another commentary 
by the same author, now lost. The commentary by Li Yuanzhuo alias Li 

Shibiao ^ dr , also differs from Li’s work in 1263 Zhuang Lie shilun. 

Only six commentators out of the seventeen listed by Chu are in fact included in 
the present anthology. They are, in the order as listed: 



1. Guo Xiang (252-312). His commentary is quoted here from a Wumen official 

edition (guanben ^IHlK^), corrected through the critical notes by Chen Jing- 
yuan. This version of Guo Xiang’s text differs from that of 74s Nanhua zhenjing 
zhushu and also from that used by Lu Deming (556-627). 

2. Lti Huiqing (1031-1110). This text is quoted here from a Sichuan edition. Lii 
is also the author of 686 Daode zhenjing zhuan and of 96s Song dong Taiyi gong beiming. 
According to the Zhizhai shulujieti (see VDL 138), his commentary to the Zhuangzi in 
ten juan was presented to the throne in 1084. The work is listed as lost in 1430 Daozang 
quejing mulu 2.20b. In 1920, a copy was found in Khara-khoto (Karakorum) by P. K. 
Kozlov (see his Comptes rendus and Mongolei, Amdo und die tote Stadt Chara-Choto). 
From this copy, it could be ascertained that Chu Boxiu had not quoted the complete 
text. Until then, the work was extant only in the form of the long citations made by 
Chu, which were used by Jiao Hong (1541-1620) in his 1487 Zhuangzi yi. 

3. Lin Yidu (fl. 1268). Chu quotes his commentary from a printed edition 

from Masha IM'/Ji in Fujian. Lin gives a hermeneutic and symbolical reading of the 
Zhuangzi , which emphasizes the limits of human language. According to Lin, the 
Zhuangzi uses metaphors and symbols in the same way as the Tijing uses images 
( xiang Kj ; see 95.7a). Lin Yidu often refers to the dialectics of wu (nonbeing) and 
you (being). He clearly dissociates himself from Taoist interpretations of the book 
of Zhuangzi in terms of bodily exercises (see, for instance, 5.16b). The most remarkable 
aspect of his commentary, however, is his emphasis on the concepts of ming np (man- 
date), xing '[4 (nature), and li fl (principle), which he takes here from the famous 
words of the Tijing-. “to explore li to its limits, to examine the very core of one’s xing, 
so as to reach [an understanding of] ming. 

Lin distinguishes three levels of explorations. “To explore li to its limits” corre- 
sponds to ordinary life and therefore means “to listen with one’s ears.” ‘To examine 
the very core of one’s xing’'’ corresponds to “listening with one’s heart” and to “reverse 
hearing.” Finally, “to reach [an understanding of] ming ” consists in “listening with 
the qi, or with the Void” (see 8.4b and 99.3b). These interpretations are related to the 
meaning Lin gives to the three concepts: Ming existed before life and also constitutes 
the very substance of life (see 36.10a and 74.4a); it thus stands for the Origin in terms 
of the Void. The ming as attribute of an individual is subjective, and thus plural. This 
subjective and plural aspect of the ming is the xing, which appears here following the 
spirit. Xing is the “true nature,” a particular aspect of the ming that one has to retrieve. 
The li, finally, is the objective ( zaiwu jtffij) aspect of the xing and thus opposed to the 
subjective xing. The ultimate stage of the Tao is therefore the ming as origin of all be- 
ings and as the point at which they all are still undifferentiated (to illustrate this stage, 
Lin Yidu uses the term qiwu of the Zhuangzi , that is, the fusion into unity of all 



[ 678 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 

beings). This stage is superior to “the answer” given to the exterior world (see 8.4b; 
99.3b; 74-4a; 36.9b-ioa; 105.5a, 106.10b). However, the relationship between ming 
and xing is the same as that between Heaven (here equated with ming) and humanity 
(here equated with xing), as well as that between yang and yin. In other words, ming 
and xing are complementary and both necessary. 

4. Chen Xiangdao |js| §¥ xft , zi Yongzhi ^j JL (1053-1093). Chen was from Minqing 
HU in Fujian, a Confiician scholar, and author of a Book on Ritual (Lishu $8 U ) and 
of a commentary to the Analects ( Lunyu fra §§ ). His commentary is quoted only in the 
first half of Chu Boxiu’s anthology. 

5. Chen Jingyuan is the author of the Zhuangzi commentary 736 Nanhua zben- 
jing zhangju yinyi. The text quoted here under his name is, however, another com- 
mentary, otherwise unknown. Chen’s interpretation is more mystical than others and 
recommends renunciation and forgetting. 

6. The next commentary is that of Lin Xiyi, which corresponds, with many 
variants, to Lin’s 73 S Nanhua zhenjing kouyi. The edition quoted here was printed in 
Fujian. 

7. Chu Boxiu’s own commentary comes last. Chu adds to his interpretation a gen- 
eral conclusion for each chapter. He often uses philological methods, compares variant 
readings, avows the difficulties in understanding certain terms, compares passages, 
and so on. Chen, however, also proposes his own system of interpretation, centering 
on the notions of yangxing Hf4 (to nourish one’s nature) and fixing '[4 (to return 
to one’s nature). This return can be accomplished through “total forgetting” (jian- 
wang (Hi'S), which is the “nonmental” ( wuxin ML')- Because of this wuxin , Chen 
rejects the qi techniques and also criticizes Inner Alchemy. He declares that the “I” (wo 
fy,) that is eternal is not the body of flesh but the “marvelous void,” which is colorless 
and cannot be seen. Chen therefore is also opposed to all Taoist techniques of visual- 
ization. He reconciles Taoism and Confucianism and declares that Zhuangzi reveals 
“the heart” of the teachings of Confucius (98.10a). For him, Confucianism proposes 
the “inner learning” that culminates in the “outward learning” of Taoism (49.7a-b). 
He quotes the Ximing of Zhang Zai MW (1020-1076) as being close to the 
spirit of Zhuangzi (19.13a), and he often quotes the famous words of the Tying, also 
regularly adduced by the Confucians: “to explore li to its limits, to examine the very 
core of one’s xing, so as to reach [an understanding of] ming.” He sees, for instance, a 
connection between these three concepts and the three first chapters of the Zhuangzi 
(see 5.5a). 



Isabelle Robinet 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 679 ] 



Zhuang Lie shilun jf£ JflJ + 

29 fols. 

By Li Yuanzhuo ^fcjt^L,zi Shibiao it it; Song (960-1279) 

1263 (fasc. 1001) 

“Ten Discussions on the Zhuangzi and the Liezi.” This is a collection of short essays 
on particular passages of these works, nine having been taken from the Zhuangzi and 
one from the Liezi. 

The author is identified as instructor of the Imperial College (Taixue jiaoshou M 
He appears not to be known elsewhere. The work is mentioned in several 
Song catalogues under the title Zhuangzi shilun ife-FMcm (VDL 137). The ten essays 
concern: 

1. The dream of Zhuangzi (Qiwu lun ’M'tylm) 

2. Bao Ding (Yangsheng zhu jskMM.) 

3. Hiding the boat (Da zongshi zrc §tfi ) 

4. Yan Hui’s meditation (Da zongshi Sfp ) 

5. Hu Zi and the shaman (Ting Hwang Miff I) 

6. The Mysterious Pearl (Tiandi 

7. Zhuangzi and the fishes (Qiushui f^zfc.) 

8. The drunk who fell from the cart (Dash eng j^^L) 

9. The Tao of old (Tianxia MM) 

10. The story of Songhua zi (ZhouMuwang |S| fUrE) 

Nine topics come from the Zhuangzi and one from the Liezi. The work is quoted 
by Jiao Hong MM (1541-1620) at the end of his 1487 Zhuangzi yi (“Fulu Pft ii< 22a 
ff.) under the title Zhuangzi jiulun $£ -p A iw • 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 

Zhuangzi neipian dingzheng £ir M I'M W> f I iH 

2 juan 

By Wu Cheng jUd: (1249-1333) 

741 (fasc. 497 ) 

“Zhuangzi’s Inner Chapters Correctly Arranged.” When Wu Cheng produced 
his commentary on the Daodejing (704 Daode zhenjing zhu), he rearranged the tradi- 
tional eighty-one paragraphs into sixty-eight larger units. Apparently acting on the 
same impulse, Wu composed this text. As indicated by the title, Wu Cheng’s own 
contribution limits itself to providing paragraph divisions for the ZhuangzT s seven 
Inner Chapters. 

Similar to his treatment of the text of the Daode jing, Wu Cheng’s tendency 
is to concentrate more material into one paragraph than is customary today. Thus, 



[ 6 So ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



clearly separated subdivisions of the original text are often found together in one new 
paragraph, which in itself is not problematic. Wu Cheng’s idiosyncratic approach 
becomes objectionable, however, where subdivisions of the Zhuangzi that form one 
logical unity are divided over two new paragraphs, as in the final section of the fifth 
Zhuangzi chapter (“Dechong fti 2.6a-b). 

The Zhuangzi neipian dingzheng has been preserved only in the Daozang. 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 

Nanhua zhenjing xunben ijl R M. M 

30 juan 

By Luo Miandao UMiM (d. 1367), collated by his disciple Peng Xiang 

742 (fasc. 498-502) 

“Fundamental Zhuangzi.''’ The author explains the tide of his work in the short 
prefatory essay “Nanhua zhenjing xunben shin ff MM” According to Luo Miandao, the 
Zhuangzi was misinterpreted on numerous occasions by commentators who sought 
to explain the text in Pure Conversation (qingtan j#|£), Chan Buddhist, or Confiician 
terms. What all these commentators lacked was a profound knowledge of the language 
and culture of the Late Zhou period, which spawned the Zhuangzi. Luo Miandao, on 
the other hand, claims to have succeeded in interpreting the text “in accordance with 
its basic purport” (xun qi benzhi hence the term xunben in the title. 

Luo Miandao’s commentary does not extend to all of the Zhuangzi' s chapters. Juan 
28, 29, and 30 of the Nanhua zhenjing xunben limit themselves to reproducing the text 
of six of the Zhuangzi waipian chapters that Luo Miandao judged not to have been writ- 
ten by Zhuang Zhou #£ {nj himself. These chapters are : “Keyi M M “Shanxing # 'ft ” 
“Rangwang II,” “Daozhi ” “Shuojian M #J ,” and “Yufuj$( 5 £ » Apart from a few 

critical remarks, Luo Miandao considers these chapters unworthy of commentary. 

The Nanhua zhenjing xunben exerted quite some influence on later commentators. 
It is, for instance, one of the five Zhuangzi commentaries quoted most often in Jiao 
Hong’s 1487 Zhuangzi yi. The Nanhua zhenjing xunben is preserved only in the Dao- 
zang. 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 

Zhuangzi yi 

8 juan 

By Jiao Hong MM,,zi Ruohou if fH , hao Danyuan H ; (1541-1620) preface 

dated 1588 

1487 (fasc. 1117-1120) 

“Wings to the Zhuangzi." This text by the Ming scholar and bibliophile Jiao Hong, 
is the last work printed in th cXu Daozang , the 1607 addition to the Zhengtong canon. 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 681 ] 



As in the case of Jiao Hong’s i486 Laoziyi , the Daozang edition of the present work is a 
severely abridged version of the original 1588 print by Wang Yuanzhen HjK, which 
can be conveniendy consulted in the Zhongguo zixue mingzhu jicheng I 'jj if 

MhSc edition. 

In Wang Yuanzhen’s print, the main body of the text is preceded by Jiao Hong’s 
own preface (dated 1588), Wang Yuanzhen’s preface of the same year, the original table 
of contents of the Zhuangzi yi , the list of commentaries and other works consulted 
by Jiao Hong, and an essay “On Reading the Zhuangzi” (“Du Zhuangzi I $£I”). 
These items are not without interest. Jiao Hong’s preface, for instance, contains his 
views on the relation between Zhuangzi, Laozi, Confucius, and Mencius. However, 
none of the introductory items are to be found in the Daozang edition. 

In compiling this text. Jiao Hong consulted a total of forty-nine works dealing 
with the Zhuangzi , including commentaries and works on textual criticism and the 
pronunciation of the Zhuangzi' s more obscure vocabulary. The commentaries quoted 
most often by Jiao Hong are those by Guo Xiang, Lu Huiqing (1031-1100), Chu 
Boxiu (thirteenth century), Luo Miandao ISMiS (fourteenth century), and 

Lu Xixing jl (sixteenth century). Other works quoted regularly include Hong 
Mai’s Rongzhai suibi and J ia Shanxiang’s 739 Nanhua zhenjing zhiyin. In the Dao- 
zang edition, however, almost all commentaries, with the exception of the one by 
Guo Xiang and Jiao Hong’s own notes ( bicheng fllffl), have been excised. Similarly, 
Chen Jingyuan’s Zhuangzi quewu £E I Ifl IS , which in Wang Yuanzhen’s edition 
is inserted between the main text and the appendixes, is omitted in the Daozang 
edition. 

Only in the appendixes does the Daozang match Wang Yuanzhen’s edition. The ap- 
pendixes include Zhuang Zhou’s Shiji biography; Ruan Ji’s (210-263) “Zhuang 
lun Wang Anshi’s I^I (1021-1086) “Zhuangzi lun JE lira”; Su Shi’s M 

M (1036-1101) “Zhuangzi citang ji ® lEnJ'g'fd”; Li Shibiao’s “Zhuangzi 

jiulun Jlfffl” (the nine chapters dealing with the Zhuangzi in Li’s 1263 Zhuang 
Lie shilun); and a “Farewell Address” (“Zengbie IWSlJ”) by the obscure Five Dynasties 
Pan You Wang Pang’s (1042-1076) “Zashuo HDJ” can also be found in 744 
Nanhua zhenjing shiyi. 

Jan A. M.De Meyer 




[ 682 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 

3 .A. 1 .a. 3 The Liezi 

Liezi chongxu zhide zhenjing shiwen 

2 juan 

By Yin Jingshun Tang (618-907); supplemented by Chen Jingyuan 

W.lkjt,hao Bixu zi ft/gTs 1069 

733 (fasc. 466) 

‘Textual Explanations of the Liezi? In his preface dated 1069, Chen Jingyuan 
provides details on the origin of the work: he based himself on an already heavily 
damaged manuscript in two juan. The manuscript was in the calligraphy of Moxi zi 
(Xu Lingfu ffiMlfif; A- 815) and contained textual explanations of the Liezi; 
it was compiled by the assistant prefect of Dangtu "g" M county, Yin Jingshun of the 
Tang (apparendy a contemporary of Xu). In addition, Chen used another manuscript 
in Xu’s calligraphy, the Liezi with a commentary by Lu Chongxuan IM M £ (see 
732 Chongxu zhide zhenjing sijie), as well as the Liezi edition printed in 1007 by the 
Directorate of Education (guozi jinn HT'la). After having compared the different 
readings, he compiled a list of 106 variant characters in one juan, which he added as a 
supplement to Yin’s explanations. 

In the present text, Chen’s list is no longer found as a separate appendix but is 
incorporated into Yin’s explanations. Thus in most cases it is no longer possible to 
distinguish the provenance of the individual notes. They are limited to phoneric and 
semantic explanations and point out more than 200 textual differences that concern 
not only the text of the Liezi, but also the commentary by Zhang Zhan (g (fl. 370) 
and the report by Liu Xiang M [A] (see the article on 668 Chongxu zhide zhenjing). 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Chongxu zhide zhenjing jie iff 

20 juan 

By Jiang Yu ; ca. mo 

730 (fasc. 457-460) 

“Explanations of the Liezi” The tide of the otherwise unknown Song author- 
scholar of the Inner College at the Prefectural Academy in Hangzhou ( Hangzhou 
zhouxue neishe sheng f/C 'j‘H 'j'H "t* A A ) — allows a rather precise dating of his work: 
an examination system in three grades ( sanshe ), introduced under Shenzong for 

the National Academy in the capital (Taixue A^), was also applied to the academies 
on the prefectural level (Zhouxue ‘j'H ■P) in the period between 1099 and 1121 ( Huang 
Song shichao gangyao 14.6b; 18.9b). 

Judging from the formula at the beginning of the text, this work was meant to be 
presented to the court. The Siku quanshu zongmu 146.1245 notes that Jiang Yu relies 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 683 ] 



on the style of Guo Xiang’s Zhuangzi commentary— without philological annota- 
tions and with intuitive understanding. His explanations are highly praised for their 
elegance of style and thorough textual understanding, and are placed above Lin 
Xiyi’s commentary to the Liezi. 

The present edition has some lacunae (4.25a; 9.1b; 20.11a) that are also found in the 
Daozang jiytto edition (in three juan) as well as in the Siku quanshu zhenben HKi JfeU 
edition (in eight juan). 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Chongxu zhide zhenjing yijie 

6 juan 

By Song Huizong 1118 

731 (fasc. 460) 

“Explanation of the Meaning of the Liezi.” The imperial text, in the present form, 
is fragmentary and treats only half of the Liezi. In Song bibliographies, Huizong’s 
Liezi commentary is listed as comprising eight juan (VDL 101). His explanations were 
also included unabridged in the collection 732 Chongxu zhide zhenjing sijie , where the 
complete commentary has been preserved. The part missing here begins in juan 12 
of the latter work. Huizong’s preface of 1118 has also been preserved only in that coll- 
ection. In this preface, the emperor writes that after having commentated the Laozi 
and Zhuangzi, it would be impossible not to expound the Liezi (an edict to have the 
imperial commentary to the Liezi printed by the Directorate of Education and to dis- 
tribute it to scholars was issued in 1123; see Tongjian changbianjishi benmo i27.9b-ioa). 
Huizong does not linger over philological details but gives an elegant exegesis of the 
philosophical thought of the work. The main text does not show any substantial tex- 
tual variants but contains interspersed information about variant readings that come 
from Zhang Zhan’s (A- 37°) commentary. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Chongxu zhide zhenjing sijie $1 ¥. f? 0 M 

20 juan 

Compiled by Gao Shouyuan j tivf Tt;, zi Shanzhang It M, hao Heguang sanren 
1189 

732 (fasc. 461-466) 

“Four Explanations of the Liezi? Little is known about the life of the compiler. The 
Jin shi 131.2813 mentions that he held the position of a collator in the Imperial Library 
(jiaoshu langtfLMQ. | 5 ) during theTiande period (1149-1153). His compilation contains 
four commentaries together with their prefaces, a brief biography of Liezi (from 163 




[ 684 ] 3 . A. 1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 68s ] 



Xuanyuan shizi tu), Liu Xiang’s §?J [6] report, and a preface to Gao Shouyuan’s compi- 
lation, written by Mao Hui in 1189. 

The authors of the four commentaries, the first three of which are listed as inde- 
pendent works in Song bibliographies (see VDL 101), are as follows: 

1. Zhang Zhan ® (fl. 370). For his preface, in which he gives an account of the 
textual history, see Graham, “The date and composition of the Liehtzyy” (144 ff). His 
commentary in the present edition differs only slightly from the Song print repro- 
duced in Sibu congkan [ZHn[i If flj . 

2. Lu Chongxuan (fl- 735; cf. 29s Xu xian zhuan i.gb-^i). According to his 

preface, he wrote his explanations of the Liezi at the behest of Xuanzong (r. 712-756). 
From the title— Kaiyuan shengwen shenwu huangdi by which 

he refers to the emperor— it can be concluded that this commentary was written be- 
tween 739 and 742 (cf. Jiu Tang shu 9.210; 9.215). 

3. Huizong Wm (r. 1100-1125). For his commentary and preface dated 1118, see 731 
Chongxu zhide zhenjing yijie. 

4. Fan Zhixu llM- He was the executive assistant of the Left in the Department 

of State Affairs (Shangshu zuocheng falHS 7&); the preface to his explanations is by 
Wu Shizhong 4^ and dated 1119. 

Like Zhang Zhan’s and Huizong’s explanations, the two other commentaries were 
probably also included unabridged, so that in this collection four of the oldest Liezi 
commentaries have been preserved virtually complete (in juan 18, Lu’s annotations are 
missing). 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Chongxu zhide zhenjing Juanzhai kouyi /if M 04 1? (,K fK P 

8 juan 

By Lin Xiyi hao Juanzhai IfUffS?; ca. 1260 

729 (fasc. 455-456) 

“Colloquial Explanations of the Liezir Apart from this work, Lin Xiyi wrote 
commentaries in the same style on the Laozi and Zhuangzi. To the latter, a postface 
by Lin Jingde {li dated 1260 has been preserved (see 73 S Nanhua zhenjing kouyi); 
it contains an explanation of the term kouyi P H as well as biographical information 
about Lin Xiyi, and it is therefore reasonable to assume that the present work was 
also written around that year. 

Lin’s explanations are preceded by a brief biography of Liezi (from 163 Xuanyuan 
shizi tu) and by Liu Xiang’s -glj fa] memorial (see 668 Chongxu zhide zhenjing). Lin, who 
repeatedly calls himself a (Neo-) Confucian (want ; 7.11b), consistendy indicates 
text parallels to the Zhuangzi, Huainan zi, and elsewhere, and he frequendy points 
out relations to (Zen) Buddhism (e.g., 4.24a-25a). In text-critical notes he specifies 



which passages in the Liezi he considers authentic, and which portions he discounts 
(e.g., 8.26b). 

In the 1574 Jingyi tang Sfeli's! edition of the Sanzi kouyi H-pPill, Lin’s com- 
mentary is divided into two juan but does not show substantial textual differences. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

3.A.l.a.4 Others 

Xisheng jing jizhu ffi # M. HI if 

6 juan 

By Chen Jingyuan W.W,jt,hao Bixuzi (1025-1094) 

726 (fasc. 449-450) 

“Collected Commentaries on the Scripture of the Ascent to the West.” The scripture 
contains the teachings that Laozi left to the Guardian of the Pass, Yin Xi 3^11, when 
Laozi headed west. Its contents rely heavily on the Decode jing. For individual practice, 
the importance oiyangshen J| JJ (nourishing the body) and shouyi — (holding the 
One) are emphasized. The latter is to be preferred to alchemical practices (3.19b). The 
scripture is divided into thirty-nine sections with large portions rhymed— mostiy in 
mnemonic verses of eight or ten syllables (sections 5-14). 

Possibly the work was written before the mid-fourth century, as its opening sen- 
tences are cited (without, however, explicitiy naming the source) in Zhengwu lun 1.7b 
(seeZiircher, The Buddhist conquest of China, 311-12 and 436 m hi). These very opening 
and concluding passages were repeatedly the object of Buddhist polemics in the course 
of the huahu disputes, since by small textual modifications it could be proven 
either that the Buddha was Laozi’s teacher or the reverse (for the Buddhist argumenta- 
tion, see Zhenzheng lun 2.5640-5653; for the Taoist view, see also 770 Hunyuan shengji 
3.8a-b and 934 Taishang hunyuan zhenlu 22a-b). Laozi’s biography in Shenxian zhuan 
WlllfH also mentions a Xisheng jing. 

There is no reason to doubt that the present work is identical with the Xisheng 
jing frequendy cited and attacked in the historical texts in the Buddhist Canon, as 
all citations— with minor textual variants and apart from one probably erroneous 
ascription— can be found in today’s text. Similarly, all the citations in early Taoist 
compilations (e.g., WSPY, 1129 Daojiao yishu, 1123 Tiqie daojing yinyi miaomen youqi), 
correspond closely to the present text. 

For his collection, Chen Jingyuan used five originally separate commentaries, 
which he verified before producing his definitive main text. Within the work, Chen 
limits himself to pointing out textual variants. 

The five commentaries are by (1) Wei Jie $ 1 , zi Chuxuan lM£, who probably 
lived during the years 497-569 (cf. LZTT 29.4a-5b; read Tianhe for Taihe jk. 



[ 686 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 687 ] 



fO). (2) Xu Daomiao f£ijt jf|, who was, together with Pan Shizheng (585-682), 
a disciple of Wang Yuanzhi j£ (LZJLT 25.2b). (3) Chongxuan zi whose 

identity remains a mystery. (4) Li Rong known as a Taoist from Sichuan who 
in the years 658-663 took part in the Buddho-Taoist debates before the emperor (see 
Jigujin fodcw lunheng 4.387b-394c). He also left a commentary to the Laozi {722 Daode 
zhenjing zhu). (5) Liu Renhui £ # , who lived during the Wei dynasty (386-556) and 
is also known to have written a commentary on the Daode jing (see 72s Daode zhenjing 
guangsheng yi, preface). 

The explanations of the individual commentators, originally amounting to a total 
of thirteen or fourteen juan (cf. VDL 103-104), were used only selectively by Chen (see 
also 770 Hunyuan shengji 3.8a for a citation from Chongxuan zi’s commentary, which 
is not found in our text). 

The present edition is faulty: for printing If t, 7 (for 4.8b-9b), the block of If HH , 
7 (727 Wenshi zhenjing zhu i.7a-8a) was used. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Kohn, Taoist mystical philosophy, Maeda Shigeki, “ Roshi Seisho kyo ko.” 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Xishengjing H # IS 

3 juan 

Commentary by Song Huizong ca. 1117 

666 (fasc. 346-347) 

“Scripture of the Ascent to the West.” Contrary to its tide and its placement in 
the division entided benwen (fundamental scriptures), this work is an edition 
with a commentary by Song Huizong. It is preceded by an imperial preface from the 
Zhenghe period (1111-1118) in which the Xishengjing is said to be complementary to 
the Daode jing. 

Compared to 726 Xisheng jing jizhu, which is also divided into thirty-nine sections, 
our main text shows numerous textual differences, especially at the end of section 22. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Wenshi zhenjing zhu R IS If 

9 juan 

By Niu Daochun lit I? , hew Xiaoyao zi iff |j|-|p (ft. 1296) 

727 (fasc. 450-452) 

“Commentary on the True Scripture of Wenshi.” The author of this commentary 
on the Guanyin zi Iff jfr , a Quanzhen Taoist, is known to us through another work, 
276 Zheyi zhimi lun (preface dated 1296). 



The brief biography of Yin Xi (cf. 667 Wushang miaodao wenshi zhenjing) is 
followed by a preface (probably by the commentator himself) to the present “direct 
explanations” (zhijie W.M)- A postface to the Wenshi zhenjing, dated 327 and attrib- 
uted to Ge Hong, praises this work, which Ge is said here to have received from his 
master Zheng Siyuan IIP® IS (i.e., Zheng Yin). 

The nine pian H of the main text are divided into 170 sections ( zhang jpc). The 
work is commentated sentence by sentence, and the contents are again summarized at 
the end of each section. Niu’s explanations are indeed “direct” and occasionally have 
a colloquial tinge. 

Niu repeatedly refers to two otherwise unknown editions of the Guanyin zi. The 
textual passages that he cites as coming from Guo Ziqian’s edition fP^ 1^$ (4.15b; 
7.16b; 8.3a) are all found in 667 Wenshi zhenjing but not in 728 Wenshi zhenjing yanwai 
zhi, whereas the passage from the edition by Xixuan zi [surnamed] Jia 
(4.6b) is found in the latter but not in the former text. 

On the whole, the three Guanyin zi versions contained in the Daozang hardly differ 
in their main text. Most textual variants occur between the present text and 667 Wenshi 
zhenjing. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Wenshi zhenjing yanwai zhi 0 

9 juan 

By Chen Xianwei hao Baoyi zi -f-; 1254 

728 (fasc. 453-45+) 

“Meaning of the Guanyin zi beyond Its Words.” In the preface to this interpretative 
commentary (dated 1254), Chen Xianwei from Yangzhou H§ #| defends the text 
against the suspicion that it was forged by a scholar in Han times; he also gives a nu- 
merological explanation of the titles of its nine pian M ■ A note points out that Chen’s 
original commentary in three juan was divided into nine juan for the present edition. 
Wang Yi a disciple of Chen’s, states in his preface that he received this work 
from Chen and had it printed. This preface is followed by a memorial (dated 15 B.c.) 
in which Liu Xiang §l!| fn] gives an account of his collation of the text and its previous 
transmission. This memorial is not mentioned elsewhere before the Song (960-1279); 
most likely it was forged together with, or slightly after, today’s Guanyin zi. 

An edition of Chen’s commentary prior to that in the Daozang is described in 
Bisong lou cangshu zhi 66.5b-i2a, where it is said that in 1293 Ji Zhirou had a 

Bichuan Guanyin zi yanwai jingzhi H ^PIS s in three juan newly printed 

in Hangzhou. 

A Chronicle of the Emergence of the Guanyin zi, written by Zhu Xiangxian ejzljl 
7*n in 1281 as a preface to Baoyi zi’s explanations was not included in the Hangzhou 




[688] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 689 ] 



edition, nor in the Daozang edition. It probably originally introduced yet another 
printed edition. Today, this preface is most accessible in the Shoushan ge congshu vf (Jj 
PS It II edition, which, moreover, contains a strongly modified version of Wang Yi’s 
preface. 

A version of Chen’s commentary in two juan that can be traced back at least to 1591, 
due to the Dcwshu quanji ilt ill III edition, is found in the Daozang jiyao. There, 
each pian concludes with a summary from the brush of Zhu Xiangxian (and, without 
doubt, from his edition of 1281). Repeatedly, textual variants in the edition of Guo 
(that correspond with the text of 667 Wushang miaodao wenshi zhenjing; see also 727 
Wenshi zhmjing zhu) are pointed out. Two other annotations (1.22b; 2.17b) cannot 
be identified. The preface by Wang Yi is missing completely, that of the commenta- 
tor has been abridged by about 460 characters, as compared to both other editions. 
Zhu’s chronicle is abridged in the final sentence, but it does not have the lacunae of 
the Shoushange edition. 

Hans -Hermann Schmidt 

Tongxutm zhenjing zuanyi Rif If S 

12 juan 

By Du Daojian liMM, hao Nangu zi ca. 1310 

748 (fasc. 523-524) 

“Received Meaning of the True Scripture of Communication with Mystery.” This 
version of Du Daojian’s commentary on the Wenzi yC 7 ' includes a brief biography 
ofWenziby Zhao Mengfu (i2S4~i322;c£.i63Xuanyuanshizitu) and prefaces by Wu 
Quanjie (dated 1310), Huang Shiweng jSrpt'H (1310), and Du Daojian himself. 

Du, who from 1303 on was Taoist registrar (daolu ji if ) of Hangzhou jyuJ'H , revised 
an old, unspecified edition of the Wenzi. He arranged the contents into sections, at the 
end of which he added his own interpretations stressing the analogies between socio- 
political conditions and cosmic events. Compared to Xu Lingfii’s version (cf. 

the article on 74.6 Tongxuan zhenjing ), this text shows numerous corrections that are 
clearly by Du Daojian himself, as are the phonetic explanations that conclude the 
work. 

As pointed out by Yu Jiaxi ( Siku tiyao hianzheng 19.1196-99), the compilers of the 
Siku quanshu not only erroneously assumed that Du was active under the Song, but 
also failed to notice the Daozang version and relied on the fragmentary edition in the 
Tongle Aadian (with juan 1, 3, 5, 10, and 12 missing completely, and juan 8 lacking Du’s 
commentary). This edition contained, in addition to Du’s interpretations, a so-called 
“old commentary” (in juan 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 11 identical with Xu Lingfu’s commentary, 
while the annotations in juan 9 are by a different author). From this commentary, the 
compilers concluded that Du had originally formulated his “appended interpreta- 



tions” as a subcommentary to a selection of annotations by Xu Lingfu and Zhu Bian 
sjijf (see the article on 749 Tongxuan zhenjing). For the Wuying dian edition 

of 1780, this text was supplemented by a Ming printed edition without commentary 
and by Mou Yan’s (1227-1311) preface to the original edition, taken from his col- 
lected literary works. The preface by Mou Yan is not found in the Daozang version. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Hebei sheng wenwu yanjiu suo Dingzhou Hanjian zhengli xiaozu, “Dingzhou Xi Han 
Zhongshan Huaiwang mu zhujian Wenzi shiwen/jiaokan ji/de zhengli he yiyi.” 

ZJrsula-Angelika Cedzich 

Heguan zi $tHp- 

3 juan 

Commentary by Lu Dian Him (1042-1102) 

1175 (fasc. 842) 

“Master Pheasant Cap.” This philosophical work in which Taoist, Confucian, Legal- 
ist, and military-philosophical ideas are interwoven is attributed to a hermit from Chu 

who wore a cap made of pheasant feathers (see Han shu 30.1730, containing the 
earliest bibliographic mention of a work with this tide). In its present form, however, 
the work has existed only since the seventh century, after its oldest parts, dating from 
the fourth century B.c., had been supplemented, mainly in Han times but also in 
subsequent centuries (see Needham, “History of scientific thought,” 547). The incon- 
sistent information about the size and division of earlier, uncommentated versions of 
the text remains unexplained: between Tang (618-907) and Song (960-1279) times the 
number of pian H is given as fifteen, sixteen, or nineteen (see the preface and VDL 
167). Since the Ming (1368-1644) dynasty, however, there seem to have existed only 
editions in nineteen pian. 

In this oldest preserved commentary, Lu, who in an eventful career rose to the posi- 
tion of executive assistant of the Left in the Department of State Affairs (Shangshu 
zuocheng £/&), mainly paraphrases the text and cites the Confucian classics as 
well as the Taoist philosophers. He regularly indicates variant readings but only in one 
instance specifies “the edition of Su” ( Suhen iff $ ; 2. 14a). The present edition has nu- 
merous lacunae, mostly in the main text, but also in the commentary (1.2a). AMing fac- 
simile of a Song print ( Ming fu Song kanben Ejfj S f I fj $ ) of Lu’s explanations, repro- 
duced in the Sibu congkan , has somewhat fewer lacunae than the Daozang edition. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Defoort, Pheasant Cap Master; Graham, “A neglected pre-Han philosophical text”; Li 
Xueqin, “Heguan zi yu liangzhong boshu”; Peerenboom, “Heguanzi.” 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 



[ 690 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 691 ] 



Huangshi gong sushu 

23 fols. 

Preface and commentary by Wei Lu 

1178 (fasc. 849) 

“Book of Simplicity by the Duke of the Yellow Stone.” This version of the Sushu is 
not listed in the Song bibliographies. About Wei Lu nothing is known apart from the 
position (prefect of Baoxin $£{1f , in today’s Henan) and tide indicated here. 

For the contents of the text, Wei sees a division into three parts: the practice of ruling 
the empire by Dew and De ; techniques for maintaining physical existence and pre- 
serving one’s life; principles for the undertakings of the sovereigns and for putting the 
country in order. Both Zhang Liang 3S ^ (d. 187 B.c.) and Zhuge Liang §j§ M ^ (181- 
234) are said to have received the Sushu and to have practiced it with great success. 

Between the present text (1,117 characters) and 1179 Huangshi gong sushu there are, in 
addition to numerous minor variants, considerable textual differences: nbio; i2a2-6; 
i6b5 of our version are missing there, and 1179 Sushu I2a-i4a is not found in the present 
text. Also 1179 Sushu 18b ff. does not correspond at all with our text 19b ff. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Sunzi yishuo 

22 fols. 

By Zheng Youxian ft|5 ^ fj ; late eleventh or early twelfth century 

1181 (fasc. 854) 

“Gleanings of Sunzi’s [Art of War].” The first bibliographic mention of this work is 
found in Tongzhi, “Yiwen Hie,” 68.7a. All that is known about Zheng Youxian is that 
he was a native of Yingyang ff £§ (Henan). 

In the present edition, Zheng’s work is preceded by two older texts: Wei Wudi’s 
preface to the separate Sunzi edition commentated by him (Wei Wudi zhu Sunzi 
ifffiaH*) and SunWu’sjl^ biography (from Shiji 65). In a Song printed edition of 
the “Eleven Commentaries to the Sunzi” dating from Ningzong’s reign (1195-1224; cf. 
1180 Sunzi zhujie), the biography of Sun Wu and Zheng’s work figure as an appendix, 
while Wei Wudi’s preface has not been included. 

In his preface, Zheng explains that in terms of philosophical depth the Sunzi has 
the same standing for those who are concerned with the art of warfare as the Yijing 
does for Confucian scholars. Since its meaning has not been treated exhaustively by 
the ten commentators, he now proposes to answer remaining questions in a fictitious 
dialogue under the title “Gleanings of the Ten Commentaries.” Thus Zheng unfolds 
his explanations in thirty points, often supporting them with quotations from other 
military treatises and exemplifying them by historical events. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 



Zihua zi 
10 juan 

Attributed to Cheng Ben zi Zihua of the Spring and Autumn period 
( 770 _ 47S b.c.); late eleventh or early twelfth century 
1174 (fasc. 841) 

“Master Zihua.” The earliest mention of this philosophical work, which is usually 
counted among the works of the school of Eclectics (zajia ), is found in th cjun- 
zhai dushu zhi 12.511. In Chao Gongwu’s Jl&SS opinion it was written by an exami- 
nation candidate (Juzi #1 T) after the Yuanfeng period (1078-1086). The Zhongxing 
guange shuntu (in Tuhai 33.10a— b), which ascribes the text to the Confucian school, 
confirms that the existence of a Zihua zi was attested under neither the Sui nor the 
Tang; nor was it listed in the Song bibliographies. 

The work is made up of fictitious dialogues in which Master Zihua elucidates his 
ideas to “contemporaries” such as Yanzi and Confucius. The first six juan mainly pres- 
ent Confucian concepts in a Taoist guise, and juan 7-10 essentially deal with cosmol- 
ogy and metaphysics. The preceding report by Liu Xiang [rJ on the collation of the 
Zihua zi was, like the work itself, probably forged. 

By the late twelfth century, the book must have found a certain recognition, as 
Zhu Xi M (1130-1200) refers in his critique of the work to an “official edition from 
Guiji” ( Guijiguanshu banben iKlS ft5$) that, in contrast to the present edition, 
had three prefaces or postfaces (“Oudu manji If? (fi !£ Zhuzi daquan 71.8a— 9a). 

Passages from all ten juan of the text in Shuofu 46.i2b-i4b correspond to our text. The 
text of the Zihui edition of 1576-15 77 is identical but is arranged into two juan only. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

3.A.l.b Commentaries on the Tinfujing 

Huangdi yinfu jing shu if ^ M. ®ft 
3 juan 

Attributed to Li Quan ^1?, hao Daguan zi iltg-p (A. 7H-74I); eleventh 

century? 

no (fasc. 55) 

“Extended Commentary on the Yellow Emperor’s Scripture of the Hidden 
Contracts.” This commentary is based on oral instructions that Li Quan reportedly 
received from the Old Woman of Lishan lUfLl (see preface). Since the commentary 
mentions the rebellion by An Lushan $ H ULl and Shi Siming •£[ Hi] (19b), this text 
was written after 750. Each commentary is headed by an unsigned introduction. This 
work combines the traditions concerning the Tinfujing and the Old Woman of Lishan 
that became current under the Song dynasty. 



[( 92 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 693 ] 



This Tinfu jing commentary is wrongly attributed to Li Quan. In fact these are 
Yuan Shuzhen’s tiffin (eleventh century?) explanations (see 127 Huangdi yinfu jing 
jijie). The preface giving an account of Li Quan’s meeting with the Old Woman of 
Lishan, from whom he is said to have received the Yinfu jing, is an embellished version 
ol the narrative of the revelation in 592 Shenxian ganyu zhuan 1.11a— 13a (see Verellen, 
“Encounter” 377-79). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Rand, “Li Ch’iian.” 

Florian C. Reiter, with an addendum by Hans -Hermann Schmidt 

Huangdi yinfu jing jijie 

3 juan 

By Yuan Shuzhen (eleventh century?) 

127 (fasc. 58) 

“Collected Explanations of the Yellow Emperor’s Yinfu jing. ” The tide does not 
correspond to the contents of this work, since all explanations here are marked as be- 
ing by Shuzhen. Yuan, who was a registrar of the Changsha district (Hunan), presum- 
ably lived in the eleventh century. In the Song catalogues he is not listed with reference 
to the present tide but in connection with a commentary ( zhu jj ) in one juan and a 
subcommentary (shu gf L ) in three or one juan to the Yinfu jing (cf. VDL 141). 

The present work is— apart from differences listed below— identical with no 
Huangdi yinfu jingshu, attributed to Li Quan The Zhongxing guange shumu (in 

Yuhai 5.21a) notes that Yuan’s subcommentary also contained a preface and hymns. 
Here in his preface, Yuan announces that he would point out the basic ideas of the 
text before giving a detailed subcommentary. Such a formal division has not been 
maintained in the present text but only in no Yinfu jingshu, where each of the three 
juan is also concluded by a hymn. Moreover, in his preface Yuan criticizes Li Quan 
for having failed to divide the text into three sections as indicated by the explanations 
of the Mother from Mount Li. The above considerations clearly show that only 108 
Huangdi yinju jing jizhu, and not no Yinfu jingshu, can be ascribed to Li Quan. 

Yuan keeps neither to the long nor to the short textual tradition; he includes the 
disputed last part, abridged and without commentary. Counting the characters for 
each of the three sections (bearing the headings given in the legend of the Mother 
from Mount Li), Yuan claims the numbers 105, 92, and 103 (adding up to the ideal 
number of 300); in fact, we find 121, 89, and 104 characters here. 

Textual differences between the two versions of Yuan’s commentary: The present 
work contains two citations (2.4a-b) from the Laozi that are missing in no Yinfu jing- 
shu. The passages 1.133-4; i.8b9-9a,3; 1.10a; 2. 7 a6-8; 3.837; 3-iobio-na3; and 3.1139 



in that version are not found in the present text. And in no Yinfu jingshu the last part 
of the text is commentated (3.na-b). 

A summary of the present explanations to the Yinfu jing is given in Rand, “Li 
Ch’iian and Chinese military thought” 120-33. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Huangdi yinfu jing jijie 

3 juan 

By Cao Xiyun ff ^ H, zi Daochong jjf$J (eleventh century) 

hi (fasc. 55) 

“Collection of Explanations Concerning the Huangdi yinfu jing.” This collection 
contains commentaries by Chisong zi , Zhang Liang (d. 187 B.C.), Ge 

Xuan, Xu Xun, Zhongli Quan, Lu Yan, Shi Jianwu, Cui Minggong ISEjfj 

Liu Xuanying M (i.e., Liu Cao MM ), and Cao Daochong. The latter name 
stands for Cao Xiyun, the Taoist poetess who compiled this work (also Quan Song ci 
2:700 and Song shi 208.5388, “Cao Xiyun geshi houji two juan). 

The text of the short version, comprising some 300 words, is divided into three 
paragraphs (see 31 Huangdi yinfu jing). The commentaries also deal with the title of 
the scripture itself and explain the three subtitles. The Yinfu jing has been understood 
as referring to questions of individual self-cultivation and the spheres of the family and 
the state. Several commentaries use lyrical forms. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Huangdi yinfu jing jie f| # PS jxf M 

21 fols. 

By Jian Changchen IhM, hao Baoning dashi fjfc ^ gjjj (eleventh century) 

113 (fasc. 55) 

“Explanations Concerning the Huangdi yinfu jing.” These explanations were writ- 
ten by the court Taoist Jian Changchen. His preface emphasizes their novelty. In the 
section following the preface, titled ‘The Traces of the Yinfu jing,” Jian explains the 
discrepancy between the approximately 300 words that the Yinfu jing is traditionally 
said to comprise and those versions that have about 400 words. The Queen Mother 
of the West, he says, revealed the text to Huangdi, and Huangdi in turn added his 
own commentary, accounting for the difference of about 100 words. Jian separates 
what is believed to be Huangdi’s commentary and inserts the title “Expositions about 
the Huangdi yinfu” (i5b-i9a). This is the only version that divides the whole text into 
four paragraphs. 

The commentary is based on the assumption that the effects of “hidden correspon- 
dences” can be detected in the heavenly forces that find their visible expression in signs 




f 694 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 69s ] 



(xiang % ) and, especially, in the mirror of the heart or mind. In this sense, the inter- 
pretations focus on the heart or mind. A few quotations are taken from philosophical 
books, including the Zhuangzi and Liezi. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Huang Ai yinfu jing zhujie 

20 fols. 

By Ren Zhaoyi fi ; Northern Song (960-1127) 

114 (fasc. 56) 

“Commentaries and Explanations Concerning the Huang di yinfu jing. ” This work 
deals mainly with the Tao of Heaven and humanity and with the principles of the 
moving forces that lead to their “hidden correspondence” ( yinfu The author is 

said to have written this work on the basis of instructions by unnamed zhenren (see 
the preface). 

The scripture is given in its short version of about 300 words. The three subtides 
(see 31 Huang di yinfu jing) are incorporated into the commentaries. The commentar- 
ies show a strong emphasis on the concepts and terminology of the neidan school of 
the Song period. They feature the cultivation of human nature and the microcosmic 
and macrocosmic processes that are produced by yin and yang and result in life and 
death. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Huangdi yinfu jing zhu M HI? ff If IE 

12 fols. 

By Huang Juzhen igf ® R , hao Xujing dashi lM Northern Song (960- 

1127) 

115 (fasc. 56) 

“Commentary on the Huangdi yinfu jing.” The author of this commentary was a 
court Taoist. The Queen Mother of the West (Xi wang mu), wishing to help humanity, 
revealed these instructions to the Yellow Emperor (Huangdi), who shaped them in 
this book. Yinfu , meaning “hidden correspondences or contracts,” designate the con- 
sensus that characterized the meeting of Xi wang mu and Huangdi (see the preface). 

The text of the scripture in its short version, in some 300 words, is not subdivided, 
and the three subtitles (see 31 Huangdi yinfu jing) appear as integral parts of the com- 
mentary. The commentary provides brief definitions of the terminology. 

Florian C. Reiter 



Huangdi yinfu jing zhu ft fit ^ Tf M if 

8 fols. 

By Shen Yafu tfc'Si.fz (eleventh or early twelfth century?) 

116 (fasc. 56) 

“Commentary on the Huangdi yinfu jing.” Nothing is known about the author 
of this commentary, except his tide of supervising secretary (jishi zhong ia). 

Since bibliographic mendon of the work is found in Tongzhi, “Yiwen liie,” 5.4b, it may 
be assumed that Shen lived in the eleventh or early twelfth century. The preface bears 
no attribution but is most likely by Shen himself. It relates the Yinfu jing to neidan F*3 

theories, which Shen also uses later in his explanations. 

The text on which Shen commentates is the short version of the Yinfu jing (316 
characters) with the well-known threefold division. 

Hans-Hennann Schmidt 

Huangdi yinfu jing zhu i 

9 fols. 

By Cai shi MR (twelfth century) 

117 (fasc. 56) 

“Commentary on the Huangdi yinfu jing.” This text contains Zhu Xi’s ftzM; (1130- 
1200) commentary on the Yinfu jing, which has also been attributed to his student Cai 
Yuanding MftgL- This text is die same as 124 Huangdi yinfu jing zhujie ia-8a (q.v.). 

Florian C. Reiter 

Huangdi yinfu jing jieyi IS $¥ S§ 

23 fols. 

By Xiao Zhenzai M R ^ (twelfth century) 

118 (fasc. 56) 

“Explanations of the Meaning of the Huangdi yinfu jing.” The author of this text 
was an official in Sichuan. According to Tongzhi , “Yiwen liie” 5.4b, this work origi- 
nally comprised three juan (VDL 140). 

The short version of the scripture, in approximately 300 words, is divided into 
three paragraphs (see 31 Huangdi yinfu jing). The commentary for the first paragraph 
is no longer extant, as remarked by the unknown editor (ib). The commentaries for 
the second and third paragraphs are quite extensive. They mainly quote philosophical 
and classic books, including the Zhuangzi , Liezi , Lunyu , and Mengzi. 

Xiao Zhenzai criticizes the long version of the Yinfu jing, comprising about 400 
words (see 31 Huangdi yinfu jing), which he believes to be incorrect (23b). 

Florian C. Reiter 




[ 696 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 

Yinfu jing sanhuang yujue ^ H jf| I 

3 juan 

Eleventh or twelfth century (?) 

119 (fasc. 57) 

Jade Instructions on the Yinfu jins by the Three August Ones.” This commentary 
is mentioned neither in the Song catalogues, nor on the list of Yinfu jing versions given 
by Gao Sisun (Jinshi jJti 1181) in his Ziliie (i.ib-2a); it is, however, cited with some 
textual variants in the late twelfth century by Hou Shanyuan £ # $H ( 1061 Shangqing 
Taixuanji 4.11a). 

In his preface, the Yellow Emperor gives an account of his discovery of the text 
and of his search for a capable exegete, which led him to Guangcheng Zi /gMc A on 
Mount Kongtong (SAM and to Tianzhen huangren ^il^on Mount Emei 
(cf. 388 Taishang bngbao wufu xu 3.i7a-i8a). The work now contains the explanations 
that Huangdi received from these two figures. The Yinfu jins, * n *ts short version of 
324 characters, is expounded sentence by sentence, and also the question of its practical 
applicability is discussed. The interpretations depict the human body as a reflection of 
the macrocosm (e.g., 1.5b) and point to the relation of the Yinfu jins w ith the physi- 
ological alchemy that aims at regaining the pure yang ( chunyans i.ib-2b). The 
Three August Ones signify the three cinnabar fields within the human body. 

A much abridged version of our present text is found with some textual variants in 
263 Xiuzhen shishu 3.4b-ioa under the tide “Essentials of the Yinfu jins” 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Huangdi yinfu jins Sf ftfi® !i 

18 fols. 

ByLiu Chuxuan A A A , hao Changshengzi A A f ; preface dated 1191 

122 (fasc.57) 

Commentary on the Huunsdi yinfu jins . ” This commentary was written by the 
Quanzhen patriarch Liu Chuxuan. There is a preface (dated 1191) by Fan Yi yg 
'Ifl , written at the request of Bi Shouzhen l|S tF lj| . The preface sketches the history 
of the transmission of the scripture, beginning with Huangdi. It does not mention 
the traditions concerning the Mother from Mount Li (see no Huunsdi yinfu jins 
shu ). 

The short version of the text, in approximately 300 words, is divided into three 
paragraphs (see 31 Huangdi yinfu jing). The commentary is based on concepts typical 
of the Quanzhen ^ lj J school. The composition of the Yinfu jing is said to be the result 
of Huangdi’s efforts to comprehend the Tao. Liu Chuxuan compares Huangdi’s 
success with Sakyamuni’s enlightenment and existence as Buddha. Therefore, the 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 697 ] 

revelation of the Huungdi yinfu jing could be compared with the composition of the 
Diamond Sutra (fin’gang jing ^z| 3 |!|$S). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Reiter, “The blending of religious convictions” 425-55. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Huangdi yinfu jingjiangyi 
4 juan 

By Xia Yuanding MlC l M,zi Zongyu ff ^ , hao Yunfeng sanren © A ; 1227 
109 (fasc. 54) 

“Discussions about the Huangdi yinfu jing” These discussions have a preface by 
Lou Fang dated 1226. Lou Fang at one time held a position in the military 
administration ofXinghua ® it (Fujian). Xia Yuanding of Zhejiang went to see him. 
He brought along his explanations concerning the Yinfu jing. These explanations, 
however, had been based on the instructions of an (unnamed) adept, whom he had 
met on Mount Heng. 

The long version (approximately 400 words; see 31 Huangdi yinfu jing) of the text 

I is not divided into three paragraphs (see 31 Huangdi yinfu jing). The commentary 

represents neidan A TJ traditions of the Song period (960-1279), as demonstrated by 
its quotations. The author cites the present work in 146 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian 
jiangyi 5.9b, using the Yinfu jing to comment upon the Wuzhen pian jJtH. Juan 4 
of the present text is entitled “Huangdi yinfu jing jiangyi tu shuo 01 ^.” It contains 
twelve texts, some of which are illustrated with charts. These texts deal with neidan 
theory, but they do not seem to be connected with the Yinfu jing in a direct way. This 
juan 4 also contains three prefaces or postfaces that partly refer to a commentary by Xia 
Yuanding concerning the text Cuigong ruyao jing JM A A H ■ This text is no longer 
extant (see 4.io-i2a, “Yunfeng ruyao jing jian xu M ifi A H M H ” by Liu Yuanliang 

® AM, dated 1226). There is a postface by Wang Jiuwan A flM (4-i4b-i6b), dated 
1227. Most texts in juan 4 either were written by Xia Yuanding or refer to him and his 
Three Books on the Gold-Elixir (Yunfeng jindan sanshu ©Jf^ Afl'HlI)- There is no 
obvious connection between that title and 3/ Huangdi yinfu jing. 

Florian C. Reiter 



[ 6gS ] 3. A. 1 Philosophy 

Huangdi yinfu jing zhu If 

2 juan 

By Tang Chun bao Jinling daoren jjzlixl A; preface dated 1229 

121 (fasc. 57) 

“Commentary on the Huangdi yinjujing” This text has a preface by Meng Chuo- 
ran (dated 1229). The preface says that Zhou Zhiming InJ MK organized the 

printing of this work. 

Several commentators, including Heshang gong and Lii Zhenren SR A, 
make their statements on the scripture in its short version of some 300 words and also 
on the three subtitles (see 31 Huang di yinfu jing). The selected quotations deal with 
aspects of meditative self-cultivation. The second chapter introduces the commentar- 
ies of the Old Mother (Laomu £ 5 ). However, there is no evidence identifying the 
latter with the well-known Old Woman of Lishan li|l| (see no Huangdi yinfu jing 
shu). The Yinfu jing is said to deal exclusively with individual self-cultivation, despite 
its analogies taken from military philosophy (2.6a-6b). 

Florian C. Reiter 

Huangdi yinfu jing xinfa 1^ 

3 juan 

By Xu Yuanyi ff A - , boo Liuxu sanren A (fl. 1291) 

120 (fasc. 57) 

“Yinjujing by the Yellow Emperor as a Method of Spiritual Cultivation.” About its 
author, a native of Tongchuan (S J 1 1 (Sichuan), nothing is known except that in 1291 
he wrote a commentary to the Laozi (cf. 723 Daode zhenjing jiyi dazhi 1.11a) that was 
included in the collection 724 Daode zhenjing jiyi. 

In the present work, Xu interprets the Yinfu jing as a method for the cultivation 
of the mind (xinfa Alic). The main text comprises 441 characters, divided into three 
parts, each with a separate heading. As stated by Xu, cultivating the Tao is the same 
as cultivating one’s mind (xiudao ji xiuxin 1.2b). His explanations are 

clearly Neo-Confucian in outlook. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Huangdi yinfu jing zhu ft Yf? PH? fyf lit 

9 fols. 

By Hou Shanyuan fUff $rf, bao Taixuan zi AAA; Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) 

123 (fasc. 58) 

“Commentary on the Huangdi yinfu jing.'” This work has a preface of unknown 
origin. It states that yin ^ and fu ff represent the internal and external phenom- 
ena of human nature. The moving forces of life and the ways and means to control 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 699 ] 



or direct life are all human faculties. Hou Shanyuan lived on Mount Gushe 
(Shanxi). 

The long version (about 400 words; see 31 Huangdi yinfu jing) of the text has not 
been subdivided into paragraphs. The commentaries consist of short sentences that 
intend only to clarify the diction of the scripture. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Huangdi yinfu jing zbujie 

10 fols. 

Attributed to Zou Xin Wotf (Zhu Xi AH [1130-1200]); ca. 1305 

124 (fasc. 58) 

“Commentary on the Yinjujing.” The heading attributes this commentray to Zou 
Xin, a Taoist from Kongtong fl$[tl|sj. Kongtong was the mountain on which the Yellow 
Emperor discoursed with Guangcheng zi f^f£A on the meaning of the Yinjujing 
(cf. the preface to up Yinjujing sanhuang yujue). Zou Xin is a pseudonym for Zhu Xi: 
during the Warring States period, Zou was the name of a state that earlier had been 
called Zhu 7^; and xin Iff is synonymous with xi H (cf. 1001 Zhouyi cantong qi 3.8a). 
The present work is identical with the commentary in Zhu Xi’s Yinjujing kaoyi PUff- 

MU. 

The real author of this commentary is named by Huang Ruijie if fS §J 5 in his 
compilation Zbuzi chengshu A AfKlt (preface dated 1305). According to Huang, the 
explanations to the Yinfu jing are not by Zhu Xi himself (he only revised the text), 
but by his friend and collaborator Cai Yuanding HtC/E: (1139-1198). This statement 
by Huang also answers the question about the identity of the Mr. Cai (Caishi H jj; ), 
who is named as the author of an identical commentary that figures separately in the 
Daozang (117 Huangdi yinfu jing zhu). 

Cai used the long version of the Yinfu jing (446 characters), which he divided into 
three pian Wt . The disputed last part of the text is left uncommentated by him. In 
supplementary notes, Huang Ruijie, whose name is not given in the present edition, 
quotes additional sources and points out textual variants in four different versions (8a) 
of the Yinjujing. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Huangdi yinfu jing jiasong jiezhu If I? 

3 juan 

By Wang Jie Afft, zi Daoyuan iffl , hao Hunran zi A (A- 1331) 

126 (fasc. 58) 

“Commentary on the Yinfu jing , with Hymns Inserted.” This commentary is by 
the prolific Quanzhen adept from Nanchang j^f H . In his undated preface, the author 




[ 700 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 701 ] 



gives his own interpretation of the term quanzhen ^(Sl by stating that it means the 
completeness of essence (jing ff ), breath (qi Hi,), and spirit (shen |$). In keeping 
with this theory, the commentary is largely centered on cosmological and neidan f^j 
J 3 } considerations. The authority for cosmological theory is Shao Yong, for Inner 
Alchemy both Zhang Zivang and the patriarchs of the Xishan tradition (e.g., Shi 
Jianwu; 3.5b). At the end of each paragraph of the commentary there is a hymn. 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Huangdi yinfu jing zbu Jf 

12 fols. 

By Yu Yan , hao Linwu shanren ill A, boo Yuwu sou 2f£ preface 

dated 1348 

125 (fasc. 58) 

“Commentary on the Huangdi yinju jing.” The preface by Shi Yu is dated 
1348. It praises Yu Yan (1258-1314), a specialist on the Tying (see 100s Zhouyi cantong 
qifahui). This work was published after the death of Yu Yan (preface). 

The text is presented in its short version of some 300 words (see 31 Huangdi yinju 
jing). In doing so, Yu Yan explicitly (na) follows Zhu Xi (1130-1200), who 
thought that the additional sentences making up the long version (aproximately 400 
words) were in fact commentaries. Concerning this notion, compare 113 Huangdi 
yinju jing jie. Yu Yan gives philological and naturalistic explanations about the world 
of humanity. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Hunyuan yangfu jing 

1 fol. 

32 (fasc. 27) 

“Positive Covenant with Undifferentiated Beginning [i.e., Laozi].” This short text, 
140 characters long, is a counterpart, and a possible appendix, to 31 Huangdi yinju jing. 
Its cryptic wording refers to the flow of energies in the body. It is intended as an aid 
for concentration during meditation. 

Kristofer Scbipper 



3.A.1.C Commentaries on the Zhouyi cantong qi 
and Related Scriptures 

Zhouyi cantong qi J §1 H # (oj fg 
3 juan 

By Zhu Xi alias Kongtong daoshi Zou Xin 3 ? (nlxtilSPIff (1130-1200); 
edited by Huang Ruijie ff 
1001 (fasc. 623) 

“Concordance of the Three According to the Book of Changes.” This is a com- 
mentary on the Cantong qi by the great Confucian thinker of the Southern Song. The 
work is mentioned in the “Yiwen zhi” of the Song shi. The Zhizhai shulujieti lists it 
under the title “Critical Edition” ( Cantong qi kaoyi H; VDL 112). In the present 

edition, the title is followed by the words, “With Additional Remarks by the Dis- 
ciple Huang Ruijie of Luling f] 8l§t [near Nanchang, in modern Jiangxi].” Huang’s 
remarks (Julu pfjit) are given in small print between paragraphs and at the end of the 
work. 

The work is signed at the end by the author, who calls himself Kongtong daoshi 
Zou Xin (3.8a). Huang explains in his long commentary that follows that this pen 
name was chosen by Zhu Xi because the state of Zou in ancient China was the home 
of the sage Zhuzi ffi-F . As to Xin §f , this name was glossed by the commentators of 
the classics as a synonym of xi U (M . ; see 3.8a). 

In his later years, Zhu Xi turned to the study of the Tijing and also became inter- 
ested in the Cantong qi. At the time, Zhu Xi had retired to Kaoting in Jianyang 
county in northern Fujian. His former disciple, assistant, and intimate friend Cai 
Yuanding HtC/E:, zi Jitong ^jjl (1135-1198), came to see him in 1197 when Cai was 
on his way to his place of exile in Henan (Cai had been condemned following accusa- 
tions of heterodoxy by court officials against Zhu Xi and his students). According to 
the narrative, the two men remained together a whole night discussing the text of the 
Cantong qi and establishing correct readings, thus finalizing the work. 

Zhu Xi compared several editions of the Cantong qi, though he mentions explic- 
itly (and at times amends) only the edition of Peng Xiao (see 1002 Zhouyi cantong 
qi fenzhang tongzhen yi). For example, Peng’s version (1.4b) has the sentence “The 
Five Agents obtain their principle 2 f? which Zhu changed into ‘The Five 

Agents obtain their sequence Hff The amendments are relatively minor. 

On the whole, Zhu Xi’s glosses do not show great penetration of the text; Yu Yan 
criticized them, saying that Zhu’s commentary comprised many doubtful passages 
and was in some places obscure (see 100s Zhouyi cantong qi fahui, preface). The work 
remained influential, however, in that it established a dialogue between Taoists and 
Confucians. Thus Zhang Yucai jjH ® Pi , Thirty-eighth Heavenly Master, in his preface 




[ 702 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 

to the above-mentioned edition by Yu Yan, says that Zhu Xi in his old age aspired to 
immortality and therefore took up the study of this text. 

Tuan Binglin# 

Zhouyi canton# qi zhu M Jo # [ 3 JIS li 

3 juan 

Twelfth century or later 

1000 (fasc. 622) 

“Commentary on the Canton 0 qi.” This anonymous commentary on the Canton# 
qi follows the main text as edited by Peng Xiao (see 1002 Zhouyi canton# qifenzhan# 
ton#zhen yi) in ninety chapters (zhan# :§£). It must therefore be later than Peng 
Xiao’s edition (947)- This later date is also suggested by other evidence: page 3.16b 
quotes a “Zihua zi” corresponding to 1174 Zihua zi i.2a-2b. The latter work is of the 
Southern Song period (1127-1279). In many places, the commentary seems to be miss- 
ing (chapters 48 to 58). 

The commentary stresses the correspondances between Outer and Inner Alchemy. 
Most glosses explain the contents of the work in terms of the human body and physio- 
logical, notably sexual, functions; see, for instance, the comments on chapter 60 where 
sexuality is metaphorically addressed. The Book of the Yellow Court {Huan#tin# jin# 
H is quoted in many places. 

Tuan Binglin# 

Zhouyi canton# qijie MU# |SJ 

3 juan 

By Chen Xianwei W.MW, zi Zongdao hao Baoyi zi ffjj — 1234 

1007 (fasc. 628) 

“Elucidation of the Canton# qi.” The author was a daoshi from the Huai M region 
who later in life moved to the Yousheng guan in Lin’an tJc (Hangzhou). 

There he instructed his students in practice of the Canton# qi. There are three prefaces 
and postfaces. The first ( xu ), at the beginning of the text, is signed Zheng Boqian % 

iiff and dates from the fifth moon of the year 1234. The second and third are printed 
at the end of the work: a houxu (3.i8a-i9b) by an anonymous disciple, dated 
1245, and a “'youxu (3-i9b-2ia) by Wang Yi 1 ^, hao Xiwei zi , dated 

from the first month of 1234. In fact, the youxu terms itself a colophon {ha j?jc). This 
sequence is problematic. Since it is uncertain how the original of the present Daozan# 
version was organized, it will be useful to look more closely at the chronology. 

The colophon by Wang Yi starts out by stating that he was the oldest disciple of 
Chen Xianwei. In Zhejiang, the Canton# qi was popular at that time, and Peng 
Xiao’s edition was widely published, even by government authorities. Yet a number 



3 A .1 Philosophy [ 703 ] 

of scholars had expressed their doubts as to the authenticity of the work. At first, Wang 
himself was uncertain, but when Chen arrived in Hangzhou, and all the scholars went 
to see him to discuss the authenticity of the Canton# qi , he explained to them that Wei 
Boyang was in fact a reincarnation of Laozi and that, based on the text’s archaic and 
pure classical style, it had to be the work of the sage himself. Chen did not, however, 
wish to write a commentary. Therefore, Wang assiduously asked for his elucidations, 
wrote them down, and composed them into the present work. Then he had it printed 
in early 1234. 

The second preface, by Zheng Boqian, seems to contradict this account. It states 
that Chen Xianwei, in 1223, met with a “superior person” who taught him the true 
alchemical method. This method allowed him to gain a profound understanding of 
the Canton# qi , the very day this work came into his hands. Retiring from the world, 
Chen then practiced the Canton# qi diligendy, wrote the present commentary, and 
gave it to his disciples. 

The third preface, by the disciple who came from the Tiantai zfc mountains, 
states that he met Chen Xianwei in 1244 in the Yousheng guan at Hangzhou. 
Master Chen said that he had made an edition of the Canton# qi at the request of a 
friend and suggested that the disciple have it printed as a meritorious deed, which he 
did the following year. 

The commentary contains many references to the works of Chen Tuan, Liu 
Haichan, and Zhang Boduan. It thus may be considered to follow the so-called 
Southern school (Nanzong of Song Taoism. 

Tuan Bin#lin# 

Zhouyi canton# qi shiyi M H # M ^ & M 

3 + 25 fols. 

By Yu Yan author’s preface dated 15 September, 1281 

1006 (fasc. 627) 

“Resolving the Doubtful Passages of the Canton# qi.” This is the earliest work on 
the neidan M fl- scriptures by the great Yuan scholar. In his preface, he explains that 
he was appalled by the numerous errors he found in the current versions of the Can- 
ton# qi. He appreciates the work of Peng Xiao (see 1002 Zhouyi canton# qi fenzhan# 
ton#zhenyi) and considers the general division into ninety chapters by the latter useful, 
although he questions several specific chapter divisions. By his time, however, many 
errors had found their way into the text. Moreover, he queries Peng Xiao’s wisdom 
in giving a place apart, in an appendix, to the Song of the Tripod ( Din#qi #e jfff §§ ). 

He also criticizes Zhu Xi (1130-1200) and his commentary 1001 Zhouyi canton# 
qi as superficial and obscure. 

Tuan Bin#lin# 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 70s ] 



[ 704 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 

Zhouyi cantonq qi fahui M Jr # Ini §3 W 

9 juan 

By Yu Yan ; author’s preface dated 30 April 1284 

1005 (fasc. 625-627) 

“Explanations of the Cantonq qi .” This is one of many commentaries in the Daozanq 
by the great Yuan scholar Yu Yan. The author’s preface is preceded by three other 
prefaces: by Ruan Dengbing P/t (dated 1284), by the Thirty-eighth Heavenly 
Master, Zhang Yucai M (dated 1310), and by Du Daojian (1237-1318), respec- 
tively. According to Siku quanshu zonqmu tiyao 146, the book was printed by Zhang 
Yucai in the year (1310) of his preface. The present edition must therefore be based on 
that printed edition. 

Yu’s reasons for studying the Cantonq qi are more amply explained in his earlier 1006 
Zhouyu cantonq qi shiyi (q.v.). The present detailed commentary is a continuation of 
the work of Peng Xiao (see 1002 Zhouyi cantonq qi fenzhanq tonqzhenyi) and relies 
on different printed editions from Fujian, Jiangxi, and Zhejiang. 

Yu stresses repeatedly that the text of the Cantonq qi was to be understood entirely 
in a metaphorical sense. He glosses santonq qi as the “concordance of the three differ- 
ent kinds.” These three different kinds (lei j»l) are the three discourses: of the Tijinq, 
of Huang-Lao Taoism, and of laboratory alchemy (literally, “fire-phasing [huohou 

^m) 

Tuan Bing ling 

Zhouyi cantong qi zhu )«I H # Ini ^ t£ 

3 juan 

By Chu Huagu fff ; Southern Song (1127-1279) 

1008 (fasc. 629) 

“Commentary on the Cantonq qiV The author is unknown elswhere. This text fol- 
lows the Peng Xiao edition (see 1002 Zhouyi cantonq qi fenzhanq tonqzhen yi). The 
short and laconic commentary often quotes Zhang Boduan, making it an exponent 
of the so-called Southern school (Nanzong J^th). It can therefore be considered to 
date from the Southern Song period. 

Tuan Binqlinq 

Guwen lonqhu jinq zhushu 

3 juan 

By Wang Dao zEjtf ; presented to the throne in 1185 

996 (fasc. 620) 

“A Commentary and a Subcommentary to the Dragon and Tiger Book in Ancient 
Characters.” The author— according to the presentation memorial, a petty officer in 



the guard of one of the princes of the imperial family — met a Taoist master in 1152, who 
instructed him about the true meaning of lead and mercury in the human body. He 
began his Inner Alchemy practice in the Tianqing guan in Guiji #fS. After 

many setbacks, he met another master in 1164, who gave him different instructions, 
but again he was not successful. Only in 1173 did he finally meet a genuine master 
who told him that true lead and all the other alchemical ingredients he needed were 
produced by his own body. The refining of the effulgences of the sun and the moon 
would suffice to make the elixir. Having completed his commentary, he was able, 
thanks to the services of a fellow Taoist named Zhou Zhenyi jn] l)t — , to present his 
work to Emperor Xiaozong (r. 1163-1189) of the Southern Song dynasty, who 
invited him for a audience at court. Afterward, he had the book printed. 

The commentaries are simply phrased but detailed. Wang makes frequent use of the 
Zhouyi cantonq qi (in the 1002 edition by Peng Xiao) in order to make comparisons. 
Among other sources, the Tinjujinq is also often quoted. At the end, Wang gives two 
diagrams taken from the Cantonq qi. 

His undated colophon concerns the printed version of the book. He defends his 
system, especially against those who find his glosses too accessible for noninitiates. 

Tuan Binqlinq 

Guwen lonqhu shanqjinq zhu ]Jj fC ft ffc _h M at 

16 fols. 

Song? 

997 (fasc. 620) 

“Glosses on the Dragon and Tiger Book.” The work is undated and does not men- 
tion its author. The Cantonq qi is quoted almost exclusively as the source for the com- 
mentary. It is difficult to give any assessment as to the date and diffusion of this short 
work. 

Tuan Binqlinq 

Du lonqhu jinq 

2 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

998 (fasc. 620) 

“How to Read the Dragon and Tiger Book.” These two folios of instructions appear 
to be a sequel to 997 Guwen lonqhu shanqjinq zhu. They contain a few glosses on the 
technical terms of Inner Alchemy. 

Tuan Binqlinq 



1 




[ 706 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 707 ] 



Longhu shoujian tu 
5 fols. 

153 (fasc. 68) 

“Diagram of the Hand-Mirror of the Dragon and the Tiger.” This is a brief neidan 
ft text commenting on the diagram that opens the text. This diagram is a cosmic 
compass that relates the Yijin# trigrams to the denary cycle of the calendar. In the 
center of the diagram and around its perimeter there are texts that use alchemical 
equivalences to refer to the fusion of mercury with iron through the agent of fire. 
There is no indication of authorship. 

The first part of the text consists of brief commentaries taken from the opening of the 
Zhouyi canton# qi, mentioning Wei Boyang, traditionally the author of that work, as 
well as Xu congshi ip. ijl , who, it is said, was responsible for its transmission (cf. 100s 
Zhouyi canton# qi fabui 9.i5b-2ia and Fukui Kojun, “ Chou-i TPan-fun# ch’i” 23-24). 

The last part of the present work consists of a short series of seven-character verses. 
Each verse is an explanation of the two-word alchemical term that forms its title. These 
verses recall others found in 1003 Zhouyi canton# qi dingqige min#jin# tu by Peng 
Xiao, but are much simpler in form. 

Pauline Bentley Kcffler 

3,A.l.d Commentaries on Zhengyi, Shangqing, 
and Lingbao Scriptures 

Yuanshi shuo xiantian daode jin# zhujie 
S juan 

Commentary by Li Jiamou %\jinshi ig±, 1166; edited by Zhang Shanyuan 
hao Guifu daoren W{§. SI A (A. 1280-1294) 

3 (fasc. 13-14) 

“Explanations of the Scripture of the Way and Its Power of the Anterior Heaven, 
Revealed by the Primordial Beginning.” Yuanshi jttfa, the Primordial Begi nnin g 
speaks of himself as the undifferentiated being that existed before phenomena origi- 
nated, a being that can be named by the terms miao p'j),yuan jt,shen ffi,zhen [Jj, and 
dao ill, but that cannot be grasped in its full reality. In the philosophical discussion 
of the present text, a separate section (pian) is dedicated to each of these five terms. 
Each pian comprises one juan of 1,000 characters and is divided into nine subsections 
(zhang M). 

The date and provenance of the text are uncertain. It is worth noting that a passage 
(4-i2b) corresponds— widi slight differences in text and number of characters— to a 
passage cited (ca. 1226) by Xia Yuanding under the tide Yuanshi biyan 

m ( io<? Huang di yinfu jin# jian#yi 4.9a). 



According to the preface by Zhang Shanyuan, a Taoist master of Suzhou, Li Jiamou 
wrote a commentary on the text and had it printed in Sichuan. By 1257, Xie Tu’nan 

HI jfj could obtain only a handwritten copy of that edition. This manuscript was 
passed from Xie, together with a preface of his own, to Li Zengbo (b. 1198), 

who for his part wrote an introduction to the work before passing it on to Li Kejiu 
^ a daoshi from Jiaxing (Zhejiang), for printing. Li Kejiu supplemented the 
version with another text, entitled Bawei longwen AJsSctti and transmitted separately 
as 30 Yuanshi bawei lon#wenjin# (compare 2a there with 4.12b in the present text). 

In his preface, Zhang Shanyuan, thus presenting a new edition of the text, severely 
criticizes the interpretation of Xie Tu’nan and Li Zengbo, who related the text with 
its five pivotal terms to the Red Writings and Jade Characters in five sections revealed 
by Yuanshi tianzun in order to fix the universe (see 1 Lingbao wulian# duren shangpin 
miaojin# 1.10b). According to Zhang, these five sections were identical with five talis- 
mans prominent in the Shenxiao and (Tiantai) Lingbao traditions of the Song dynasty 
(see, e.g., 147 Lingbao wulian# duren shangjin# miaojin# futu 3.i2a-i5b, and zip Lingbao 
wulian# duren shangjin# dafa 69.153-253), whereas the origin and transmission of the 
present text could be seen solely in relation to the Daode jin#. 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

Yuqin# wuji zongzhen Wenchan# dadon# xianjin# zhu 

10 juan 

Commentary by Wei Qi hao Zhongyang zi 1309 

103 (fasc. 51-53) 

“Commentary on the Great Cavern Scripture according to Wenchang.” This is a 
commentary to sTaishan# wuji zongzhen Wenchan# dadon# xianjin# . The author, Wei 
Qi, was a daoshi from Penglai shan H [ 1 | in Sichuan. According to his preface, he 
received this book as a young boy and studied it for thirty years before making this 
new critical edition and commentary. He went to the capital to have it printed. The 
book was presented to the throne in 1310 and published with prefaces from the Thirty- 
eighth Heavenly Master, Zhang Yucai 36 |3 ft" ; the Hanlin scholar Zhang Zhongshou 
<yj| ftji ^ ; and the academician Zhao Bian lift. 

In his long preface, Wei Qi gives a presentation of the Dadon# zhenjin# and its his- 
tory. The version here is from Sichuan and was first revealed to the saint Wenchang, 
whose name in this world was Zhang Tongzhen 36 jjft ^ , at the beginning of the Zhou 
dynasty (ca. 1050-221 b.c.). Later, the book was revealed once more to Wei Hua- 
cun as part of the Shangqing scriptures. The patriarch Lu Xiujing is said to have 
edited the Dadon# zhenjin# in three parts and to have placed them under the aegis of 
Diyi Pf — ■ (Ancestral One), Ciyi M ~ (Female One), andXiongyi £§ — (Male One), 



[ 708 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy 



respectively, recomposing the text in verses of three or four characters. Later, under 
the Tang, the patriarch Wang Baohe 3 : IS ^0 made, on imperial order, a critical edition 
in thirty-nine sections. Wei also mentions the Song editions by Zhu Ziying (see 6 
Shangqing dadong zhenjmg) and Zhang Shangying, which were presented to the 
throne in mi. Wei states further that the original version of the text comprised no less 
diat one hundred and twenty juan, but it had been reduced to three juan and subdi- 
vided into thirty-six sections by Yuchen daojun 5 jgt xS if , the deity who revealed it in 
the world. Later (3.4a) Wei explains that in addition to this version, there existed two 
other current versions of the scripture, one of Maoshan ^ (_L| , one of Longhu shan f| 
1 %. LU (see 7 Dadong yujing), both in thirty-nine sections. 

Wei Qi considers the Dadong zhenjing superior to the Durenjing Jg; A $2 , the Jiu- 
tian shengshen zhang jing and the Hnangting jing ff II because the 

present scripture reveals the esoteric names of the celestial beings and their correspon- 
dences with the spirits and energies of the human body. It teaches how to connect 
the superior and inferior spheres of the universe and to link the inner and the outer 
worlds. 

The first two juan, and also part of the third, contain introductory material about 
the scripture and its divine author. In the first juan, Wei Qi exposes in a methodi- 
cal way his cosmological system, which is very much influenced by Neo-Confucian 
thought and Inner Alchemy. (See fig. 2.) 

The second juan gives a general presentation of the scripture. It explains the title as 
well as the symbolical numbers that are common to the Tijing and the Dadong zhen- 
jing. It records (i7a-2ia) the “preface” by Wenchang, the divine revealer of the text 
(compare s Dadong xianjing), and it gives a list of deities and legendary persons to be 
invoked. There is also a ritual for the recitation of the text, which is similar to that in 
S Dadong xianjing 5b-9a. 

The main text of the scripture starts at 3.13a and ends on 10.30b. It is essentially 
the same as s Dadong xianjing. Wei Qi indicates (3.13b) the differences between this 
revealed version and the traditional Dadong zhenjing of the Shangqing school: they 
are mainly textual and concern the order of the sections. This judgment is borne out 
by the comparison of the present version with 6 Dadong zhenjing, edited by Jiang 
Zongying jf# tk • The present version, writes Wei, was originally divided into three 
juan. It has thirty-four sections (and not thirty-eight, as does s Dadong xianjing, or 
thirty-nine, as does 6 Dadong zhenjing). The order in which sections 15 to 21 are placed 
here is different from all other editions. 

In the beginning of each juan, there is a short preface ( xujing ) beginning with 

the words: “The Tao speaks . . .” There is also a conclusion at the end of each juan. 

Each of the thirty-four sections, moreover, begins with a text spoken by Yuanshi 
tianwang jtftujUE, explaining the multiple correspondences between the given sec- 



[709 ] 




figure 2. Instruments 
for Heavenly Music 
( 103 1.22b) 



tion and a number of cosmic correlates. Each section also ends with a kind of summary 
assessing the relationships between certain practices and their efficacy. 

Wei Qi’s commentary is based on the principle of multiple levels of interpretation. 
These levels are the world, the inner universe, and the heavenly spheres. The human 
microcosm is considered to be a metaphorical expression of realities in the heavens or 
in the universe at large. 

Wei Qi, moreover, attempts a form of semantic analysis. In order to explain a given 
concept, he collects a number of occurrences of the same word or idea in the text and 
confronts their meanings and connotations (e.g .,jing Jt on 5-7a-8a; zhu 1 %. on 5.15b; 
su on 6.2ia-b). He also occasionally illustrates the polysemic nature of certain terms 

(for instance, wuri 5 0 on 8.24a-b). Another aspect of his commentary concerns 
language equivalences; he translates one system into another by comparing Buddhist 
terms with Taoist terms of various schools (Shangqing, Lingbao, Inner Alchemy) and 
also with Neo-Confucian terms. At times, he proposes a number of different interpre- 
tations for the same passage (for instance, 9.7b). 





[ 7io ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 

This is a profound, multifaceted, and subtle technique of interpretation. The much- 
used but rather negative term syncretism does not do justice to the virtuosity of Wei 
Qi’s technique of using multiple and interchanging systems of interpretation. This 
technique is able to demonstrate the manyfold meanings of concepts; and it is precise- 
ly this diversity of meaning that often constitutes the foundation of Taoist language. 

Combining a thorough knowledge of Shangqing and Inner Alchemy Taoism with a 
solid classical training, Wei Qi brilliandy succeeds, through his commentary, to coun- 
ter the Neo-Confucian tendency to marginalize Taoism. He most skillfully uses the 
terminology of Neo-Confucianism, in particular concepts borrowed from Mencius: 
“conscience” (liangzhi ft ft ; 3.25a) and “all beings are fully present in me” ( wanwujie 
beiyu wo H jjf ft ; 8.25b). Wei discusses, in the manner of the Neo-Confucians, 

the question of the inborn nature and the destiny (xingming ft bp) of humanity, refer- 
ring to the classics (7.11a and 12b; 5.4a-b). He also uses the term “Tao of the middle” 
(. zhongdao ftxft) in the Confucian and not in the Buddhist sense (7.27b). Against 
those like Zhu Xi ft H (1130-1200) who aimed to reject Taoism, Wei turns their own 
weapons and shows the natural links that existed between the Taoist religion and the 
cultural foundations of ancient China. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Taishang datongjing zhu ft Jl ft il US 14 

4 fols. 

Commentary by Li Daochun (d. 1306) 

105 (fasc. 54) 

“Commentary on the Book of Great Communication of the Most High.” This text 
is identical with 327 Taishang dongxuan lingbao tianzun shuo datongjing, the only dif- 
ference being the character song (hymn) in the place of ji % (gdthd). 

After having explained the tide of the work, Li Daochun glosses each sentence; 
he then addresses the general meaning of the three paragraphs and the final hymn. He 
draws on sources like the Zhongyong ft Jit and the Mengzi ft , as well as on 106 Tai- 
shang chiwen donggu jingzhu (see page 4b of the latter), a short text also commentated 
by Li. 

Catherine Despeux 

Yuanshi tianzun shuo taigu jing zhu 

11 fols. 

By Master Fish Trap, Changquan zi ft ft ft ; thirteenth century 

102 (fasc. 50) 

“Commentary on the Book of Highest Antiquity, Spoken by the Heavenly Worthy 
of Primordial Beginning.” The present work, including the preface, is nearly identical 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 711 ] 

with 106 Taishang chiwen donggu jingzhu by the same author, who is otherwise un- 
known (see 1064 Dongyuan ji). 

The text exposes the way to obtain immortality and to accede to Great Mystery 
( taixuan ft A) through cutting oneself off from (outer) vision and audition. It is 
divided into three parts, beginning each time with the words “The Tianzun says ...” 
and ending with a poem. 

Catherine Despeux 

Taishang chiwen donggu jing zhu ft A ^ ft ftl A' 14 

7 fols. 

Commentary by Master Fish Trap, Changquan zi ft ftft ; thirteenth century 

106 (fasc. 54) 

“Book of Arcane Antiquity, Red Writ of the Most High.” This short text explains 
the way to immortality and supreme mystery through the abolition of hearing and 
vision. 

Despite the different tides, this is a duplicate of 102 Yuanshi tianzun shuo taigu jing 
zhu and 107 Wushang chiwen donggu zhenjing zhu. Like the latter, the present version 
introduces each of three parts with a different tide: “Mastering Truth” ( caozhen fH [ft ), 
“Entering Sainthood” ( rusheng AS), and “Living in the World” ( zhushi ft ft). 

Catherine Despeux 

Wushang chiwen donggu zhenjing zhu f® h A M ft R M If 

6 fols. 

Commentary by Li Daochun (d. 1306) 

107 (fasc. 54) 

“True Book of Arcane Antiquity, Ultimate Red Writ.” This short text explains the 
way to obtain immortality. The main text is identical with 102 Yuanshi tianzun shuo 
taigu jing zhu and 106 Taishang chiwen donggu jing zhu , both signed Master Fish Trap, 
Changquan zi ftftft . 

Li Daochun’s commentary draws on Confucian, Taoist, and Buddhist sources. 
The term chiwen ftft (red writ) in the tide refers to the revealed Lingbao texts, where 
it designates the luminous and spontaneous script that emerged from Chaos (see 87 
Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing sizhu 2.6a) But here, Li Daochun uses the 
term with reference to Inner Alchemy and Tantric Buddhism, where red is the color of 
the qi of the Void (ib). Li specifies that in Buddhism red is the symbol of the “empty 
body.” 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Balfour, “Three brief essays.” 

Catherine Despeux 



l 




[ 712 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ m ] 



Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing sizhu 

4 juan 

Edited by Chen Jingyuan PUS jt; preface dated 1067 

87 (fasc. 38-39) 

“Four Commentaries on the Book of Salvation.” These commentaries on the Duren 
jing Aff. are preceded by three prefaces: the first by Emperor Zhenzong (see VDL 
134); the second, dated 1067, by the compiler of the present text, Chen Jingyuan 
(1025-1094) ; and the third, dated to the year jiawu ^ f- (754), by Xue Youqi |? 

(fl. 754)- The paragraph on the divisions of the Duren jing and the phonetic glosses at 
the end of the book are based on those in Zhang Wanfu’s 9s Dongxuan lingbao wuliang 
duren jingjue yinyi (7b-9b). 

The oldest of the four commentaries used by Chen Jingyuan is that of Yan 
Dong Hill (fl. 485; see LZTT 28.i4b-i5a). Although his commentary is not cited in 
juan 1, which contains the preface of the Duren jing, he refers to the events described in 
that preface elsewhere in his commentary (2.58a). Yan Dong does touch on cosmologi- 
cal matters, but the primary aim of his commentary would seem to be the definition 
of the words of the text. 

The three remaining commentaries are those of Li Shaowei Cheng 

Xuanying (fl. 640), and Xue Youqi (see LZTT 39. iob-iib). Li Shaowei appears 
to have written prior to Cheng Xuanying, as the latter seems to cite him (cf. the 
citations of a “commentary” at 3.9a, 9b, with Li’s commentary at 3.11b). 

Of the four commentaries, Li’s is not only the most frequently used, but also the 
most interesting. He cites a great number of texts, from the Dongshen canon in par- 
ticular, in order to provide a clear description of the Three Offices (2.32b-36b) and 
the Five Spirits of the body (3.2oa-2ib). He mentions a Contract for the Ascension 
to Heaven (2.59b), which a Taoist must have if the liquid part of his body is not to 
be retained by the Aquatic Officers, and the solid by the Terrestrial Officers; without 
this contract, the Celestial Officers will not open the Gate of Heaven. Li describes the 
Thirty-two Heavens both as a moral hierarchy and as a cycle whose components are 
linked to The Twenty-eight Stellar Mansions. Contrary to Yan Dong, who places the 
starting point of the cycle of heavens in the east (2.43a), Li places it in the northwest, 
at the Gate of Heaven. 

John iMgerwey 



Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing zhu 7C M ® A h on li f 

3 juan 

Commentary by Donghai Qingyuan zhenren M W 7 C R A ; hymns by Qinghe 

laoren rfM ^ A; edited, with eulogies, by Jingming daozi Guo Wangfeng jf Ejfj 

88 (fasc. 40-41) 

“Commentary on the Book of Salvation.” In his undated preface, Qinghe laoren 
states that he had decided to publish the commentary by Qingyuan zhenren because it 
represented a breakthrough in the understanding of the Duren jing. A short postface to 
the text, presumably added by Guo Wangfeng, contains five tales aimed at demonstrat- 
ing the efficacy of the recitation of the Duren jing. These tales are dated between 1174 
and 1204. Judith Boltz nonetheless suggests a late-thirteenth century date for this text 
because the district of Qinghe '/# M (Huaian prefecture, Jiangsu) was created around 
1270 (A survey of Taoist literature , 328, n. 572). She also notes that Donghai MM was 
in the same prefecture. 

Qingyuan includes in his version of the Duren jing not only the Yuanshi lingshu 
shang / xiapian AfeMHi: / and the hymn of Taiji zhenren ( 3 .2ib-22b, 45b- 
46b) found already in the Shenxiao edition (/ Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing 
i.i5a-i6a, i8a-2ob), but also a “fourth” Yuanshi lingshu , called Shangpian longzhang 
fengzhuan wen (3.22b-2 3 b). According to a note by Guo: “The Shu 

gg edition places [this writ] after the Lingshu xiapian , but given the fact that it is 
entitled Shangpian zbangzhuan , it is more appropriate to put it with the Shangpian. 
Other editions have placed it after the Shangpian , and we have done likewise (3.22b). 
The only other edition of the Duren jing in the Daozang to include this supplementary 
stanza is that of Chen Guanwu WMa (pJ Taishang dongxuan lingbao wuliang duren 
shangpin miaojing zhujie 3.22b-23a; dated 1336), and Chen, in his discussion of this 
addition (2.20a), refers to Qingyuan’s arguments as presented by Guo. 

Qingyuan simply comments on the original text, line by line and word by word. 
Although he never describes his system of interpretation as such, its key lies in the 
linking of each element of the text to an aspect of the Taoist body. The three categories 
of listeners in the Heavenly Court, for example, are identified with the essence, the qi, 
and the spirit in the body (1.5b). Since the chariots of the gods are “the product of the 
yang-essence” and the dragons and birds who pull these chariots are born of the qi of 
the yin-essence,” the saint creates them himself by breathing in and out (2.i2b-i3a). The 
fu and registers held by Taokang represent (ywUfl) the qi and the blood (3.8a). 

Qingyuan’s text is also rich in allusions both to Taoist practice and to the Tao- 
ist world of the imagination. He mentions a form of “corpse liberation by suicide 
(1.24b) and describes, in a most concrete manner, the redemptive mechanism of scrip- 
ture recitation (i.27b-28a). He further compares celestial writs, composed of qi, with 




[ 7/4 ] 3. A. 1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 71s ] 



“traces of ink,” their poor terrestrial cousins (2.6a). He links the Yujing shan, celestial 
origin of the Duren jing, to Mount Kunlun here below (2.9a). Also worthy of note 
are his reference to “nature and destiny” (xingming ft np ; 1.10b) and his use of the 
demonstrative zhegej (1.7b; Qinghe laoren also uses it: 1.16a, 2.17a, etc.). 

Guo Wangfeng’s commentary makes frequent use of the concept of xingming (1.3a, 
16a, 3.44b, etc.) and refers often to both Confucian (1.3a, 16b, etc.) and, above all, Bud- 
dhist (especially juan 2) texts. Guo even states himself (2.35a) that whereas Qingyuan 
insists on inner work ( neigong A Sj] ) and outer practice ( waixing ft ff ), he is primarily 
interested in comparing Taoist with Buddhist texts. Among the Taoist texts he uses 
are 318 Daoxuan lingbao ziran jiutian shengshen zhangjing (2.11a, 32b) and 141 Ziyang 
zhenren Wuzhen pian zhusu (3.9b). The fact that Guo belongs to the Jingming school 
is visible not only in his hew, Jingming daozi, and in the features just mentioned, but 
also in his direct use of 563 Taishang lingbao jingming feixian duren jingfa (1.28a ff. is 
the same as S63 Duren jingfa 1.17b ff.). No doubt Guo inserted the stanza on 1.32b, for 
it is also found in the 363 Jingming jingfa (i.24a-b), and Qingyuan does not comment 
on it. 

John Lagerwey 

Tungongfayu IS 

2 juan 

Wang Kesun jl 1298 

1049 (fasc. 725) 

“Dharma Words from the Cloudy Palace.” This work is a compilation of quotations 
from the classics of the Three Teachings, with a few comments by the author. In his 
preface, he explains thztxing 'ft and ming np are the common focus of all three teach- 
ings. Although a Confucian himself, Wang was aware of the necessity of cooperation 
between Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism in order to return to the Tao (preface 
ib). He compiled the present text to prove this point. Cloudy Palace (yungong ft ) 
is the name Taoists give to the sanctuary of the inner retreat (preface, 2a). 

The text itself is divided into seven items (pin pp): Former Heaven (xiantian % 
Jk ), Later Heaven (houtian '(%. Jk ), Tending Life (yangsheng H(fc), Explaining Virtue 
(mingshan Bfjii), Keeping the Methods ( chiyong ft Jfj ), Creating the Subde (zaowei Jo 
Wi ), and Divine Transformation (shenhua ftjk). A large number of books are quoted, 
sometimes implicidy. For instance, the Kongzijiayu In is extensively cited but 

not named (1.7a, 1.10a, 2.7b). The Lixue philosophers are prominent, including 
Zhou Dunyi /a] [5fj , Shao Yong, Zhang ZaiMM, Cheng Yi ft [£I , and ZhuXi A 
M • A variety of pre-Han, Han, and early medieval works are also used. Buddhist scrip- 
tures (Lahkdvatdra-sutra, Avatamsaka-sutra) and the Chan Sixth Patriarch Huineng 
Hit are more marginally represented. 



The text is loosely structured and down to earth. It reads like a point- for- point 
demonstration that Confucianism had developed its own practice of xing and ming , 
a practice wholly consistent with Taoist and Buddhist theory, but with more concrete 
objectives. There seems to be little influence of neidan (*3 ft . Little is known about 
Wang Kesun; (Hongzhi) Huizhoufuzhi jlfc'J'Hlfficf' 9-5°b indicates that he was a 
scholar from Jixi WM. (modem Anhui) who declined to hold office under the Yuan. 

Vincent Goossaert 

Tuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing tongyi 

4 juan 

By Zhang Yuchu (1361-1410) 

89 (fasc. 41-42) 

“Comprehensive Interpretation of the Book of Salvation.” This text by the Forty- 
third Heavenly Master, Zhang Yuchu, draws on virtually all earlier commentators, 
from Yan Dong ft H to Xue Jizhao As an interpretation it is derivative, rely- 

ing heavily on Xiao Yingsou’s If f® f? 90 Tuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing neiyi 
and on an otherwise lost commentary by Lei Moan S JRfi| (see article on 92 Tuanshi 
wuliang duren shangpin miaojing zhujie). 

Although Zhang first mentions Xiao Yingsou by name only on page 1.15b, his in- 
terpretation of the first part of the text in terms of Inner Alchemy derives almost en- 
tirely from Xiao (cf. i.5a-i5b and 90 Miaojing neiyi i.iob-2.6a). In addition to Zhang’s 
identified borrowings from Lei Moan, it seems likely that the prefatory diagrams not 
taken from Xiao’s Neiyi, and that link the Duren jing to thunder, also derive from Lei. 
At one point, in excluding the Tuanshi lingshu shang / xiapian 
(4.2a), Zhang invokes the joint authority of Lei and Xiao. The direct citations from 
Lei’s commentary are on the whole unremarkable. 

Zhang concludes his text with a postface to Lei Moan’s edition of the Duren jing 
originally revealed by the Celestial Lord Xin during a seance in a gengyin fftlK year 
(1290?). After recalling his revelation of the Hunyuan if-TC Thunder rites to Lei, Xin 
launches into an encomium on the Duren jing. It is die only text, says Xin, that survives 
all final cataclysms, safe in the Jade Capital. It contains within it the entire “mystery of 
Hunyuan”: the precious pearl at the beginning of the text is the human heart, and the 
Yuanshi tianzun is the “primordial spirit.” Therefore, “when one recites this text with 
appropriate concentration, it is the Primordial Beginning who recites.” Those who do 
not understand the scripture’s meaning can save neither themselves nor others. Most 
of these points are cited once again in Zhang’s commentary (1.15a, 23a-24b). 

The information furnished by this postface complements perfectly that given in Lei 
Moan’s biography in 297Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian xubian 5.nb-i4a: It was while he 




[ ji 6 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 717 ] 



was reciting the Duren jing that the Hunyuan method was originally revealed to Lei. 
Seven days later, the Celestial Lord Xin appeared to Lei to tell him that “this teach- 
ing is based entirely on the Duren jing .” Finally, Lei’s last request before writing his 
testamentary poem and expiring was that his disciples recite for him the Duren jing 
one last time. 

John Lagerwey 



Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing neiyi 

5 juan 

By Xiao Yingsou M F&. % ; 1226 

90 (fasc. 43 - 44 ) 

“Esoteric Interpretation of the Book of Salvation.” This interpretation is preceded 
by four separate texts. The first text— a memorial for liturgical use by Xiao Yingsou, 
dated 1226— states that the neiyi was originally printed separately as a book in two 
juan, but that it had then been separated into an interlinear commentary for the pres- 
ent edition. Xiao signs the memorial with his ritual tide, Shangqing dadong xuandu 
sanjingfashi 

The second text, also dated 1226, is an essay by Xiao on the “meaning of the scrip- 
ture.” The creative forces captured in the names of the scripture, says Xiao, are in no 
way different from the “drop of essence of True Yang” at the origin of each person’s 
life (2b). “The alchemical way and the meaning of the scripture are identical” (6a; cf. 
1.5b, where it is the “numinous treasure” [lingbao fiH?] and the elixir [jindan 
that are equated; also 2.8a, where the “scripture method” [jingfa is equated 

with the alchemical way). 

The third text is a description, built around cosmological diagrams, of how the 
universe is born from the “Red Writ of Chaos” ( hundong chiwen M (I 5 ! 7*5 JC ; 7a). The 
final text is entided “Instructions for the Recitation of the Scripture.” In this text, there 
is a most interesting illustration of the Inner Landscape, showing the circulation of 
yin and yang energies in the body (fig. 3). 

Starting with the literal meaning of the text— for this meaning, Xiao relies on the 
four commentaries edited by Chen Jingyuan ( 87 Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin 
miaojing sizhu\ cf. here, 6a)— Xiao then deepens this interpretation by means of a 
numerological and cosmogonic metaphorization of key elements. For the latter, Xiao 
relies principally on the Yijing and the tradition of Inner Alchemy as represented by 997 
Guwen longhu shangjing zhu, 141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian zhushu, and 999 Zhouyi 
cantong qi. Zhongli Quan, Peng Xiao, Zhang Ziyang, Shao Yong, and 
Cheng Yi are all mentioned more than once. The ultimate inspiration of Xiao’s 
hermeneutical method may well be the “scripture method,” whose name derives from 




figure 3. The circulation 
of yin and yang in the 
body: A metaphorical 
representation of the Inner 
Landscape (90 “biao,” 

8 a-b). Ming reprint of 
1598. Courtesy of the 
Bibliotheque nationale de 
France. (Chinois 9546/88) 



the title of 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa, cited several times in the present 
text: 1.1a corresponds to 219 Duren shangjing dafa, i.4b-5a; 1.12b to 8.2a; and 2.5b to 
8.10a. The latter two passages are attributed in the Neiyi to the Master in the Beyond 
( xuanshi £[Sfj ; two other passages attributed to him, at 3.15b and 4.5b, are to be found 
in 1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa 4.38b and 36a). These passages are of particular interest 
here because in the Duren dafa the first one is preceded by the phrase, “explained in 
terms of the interior,” and the second by the phrase, “explained in terms of the marvel- 
ous way of the internal landscape.” This “marvelous way” is then compared with the 
ways of the “grand method”— exorcism— and scripture recitation. The present text 
may be said to go beyond mere comparison to the synthesis of these ways. 

The numerological metaphorization of the text is unevenly distributed, with heavy 
concentration on the first lines of the Duren jing and on its tenfold recitation (i.6b-8b, 
i.i4a-2.4a). But the keystone of this system of interpretation is theLingshu zhongpian 
M Is H , whose 256 characters (eight times thirty-two) are linked to the sixty-four 
hexagrams of the Yijing (5.3a-27b). 

John Lagerwey 







[ 7iS ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing zhujie 

3 juan 

By Chen Zhixu zi Guanwu , hao Shangyang zi preface 

1336 

91 (fasc. 45-46) 

“Commentary on the Book of Salvation.” In a preface dated to midautumn of 1336, 
Chen Zhixu states that one must have both “inner practice and outer merit” in 
order to obtain immortality. He therefore interprets the Duren jing in terms of both 
the “worldly method” ( shifa tS?£) of recitation and prayer and the “Taoist usage” 
(daoyong if ) of Inner Alchemy. Sexual desire, writes Chen, leads men to squander 
their “qi of true unity” ; proper practice using the Duren jing leads to its recovery and 
sublimation. 

Chen also suggests in his preface that his interpretation is primarily indebted to the 
commentaries compiled by Chen Jingyuan (87 Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin 
miaojing sizhu) and that of Xiao Yingsou (90 Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin 

miaojing neiyi), as well as to what he learned from his master, Zhao Youqin (fl. 

1329; cf. 1069 Shangyang zijindan dayao liexian zhi 8b-9a). An examination of the com- 
mentary itself reveals that Chen borrows heavily indeed— far more than would appear 
from explicit citation— from Xiao Yingsou (especially in i.2b-2.i8b), but likewise from 
Qingyuan zhenren WthiR A (88 Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing zhu; espe- 
cially 2.2ob-3ob, 38b-4ib, 3.23b-36b). Chen also refers three times to his own master 
(1.42a, 2.42a-b, 3.2a-b) and frequently to earlier masters of his alchemical lineage such 
as Zhang Boduan. He would seem, finally, to have known Xue Jizhao’s jp^EJp 
commentary (cf. 2.35a and 92 Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing zhujie 2.23b). 

Although Chen’s implicit criticism of Xiao Yingsou for not paying equal attention 
to “nature and vitality” (. xingming ft np ) is unjust (cf. 1.2a, 7a, 8b with 90 Miaojing neiyi 
1.4a, 13a, I3b-i4a), it does reveal one of his primary concerns. At 1.8b, for example, 
Chen insists on identifying the “primordial spirit” of the heart with the “true nature,” 
and he says that “taming the heart is like taming a wild animal.” Part of the difficulty 
of taming the heart is no doubt due to the fact that “the hearts of those who believe in 
the Way are rarely solid, while the unbelieving hearts of those who do not believe are 
solid as metal and rock” (1.10a; cf. 2.42b). But the real difficulty for Chen is clearly that 
“as soon as the root of desire stirs, hell emerges” (2.45b; Xiao Yingsou, in 90 Miaojing 
neiyi 4.32a [borrowed by Chen, 3.18b], says that the most urgent of all interdictions is 
that against sexual desire, but he does not insist on the point as much as Chen). 

For Chen, the solution is to “cut off all thought of desire” and to practice the Way 
of Inner Alchemy. To do this, one must first find a teacher (1.41a; cf. 2.51b, where even 
Huang-Lao is said to have needed a teacher). In Chen’s own case, if his interpretation 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 719 ] 

of the Duren jing is indebted in the first place to that of Xiao Yingsou, it would appear 
that his teacher led him to translate that interpretation into personal alchemical experi- 
ence: when Chen glosses the “Red Writs of Chaos” ( hundong chiwen iM® A A) as die 
“true nature” and the “primordial spirit” (2.4b), he is paraphrasing Xiao’s Neiyi , 3.3a, 
4a; but when he responds to his teacher’s inquiry (2.42a-b), he says of this term that 
it is “the cold sweat that covers the body.” Apparently Chen understands the hundong 
chiwen , revealed at the beginning of time, to be comparable to the cold sweat that 
covers the microcosm of the adept’s body when he or she is subliming the elixir. Chen 
goes on, then, to describe the parallels between physical and spiritual embryogenesis 
(2.43b). 

Zhao Youqin’s metaphoric comparison of the earth to a large plank afloat on the 
waters, themselves a portion of the “heavenly carpet” (3.2b), proves to be the oc- 
casion for one of the most remarkable developments in Chen’s commentary. “This 
metaphor,” says Chen, “comes very close to the matter”; he then launches into a long 
description of contemporary versions of the ancient huntian theory M A m of the 
cosmic egg (3.2b-ioa, I3b-i8a). Although the relevance of this description to his 
alchemical interpretation of the Duren jing is not clear, it is significant that Chen 
Zhixu felt the need to relate his alchemical experiences to the most recent scientific 
discussions concerning the nature of the universe. 

John Lagerwey 

Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing zhujie 

3 juan 

By Xue Jizhao hao Xianweng Hjff ; presented 1303 or 1304 

92 (fasc. 46) 

“Commentary on the Book of Salvation.” This commentary by Xue Jizhao, a Taoist 
master from Lushan IM (JL| in possession of the Shangqing dadong baolu ilfif Ail®! ft 
M register (3.22b), is preceded by a liturgical memorial with the discrepant dates Dade 
7 (1303) and jiachen ^ M (1304). Here the author humbly presents his work to the Jade 
Emperor: “Many people recite this book, but few understand it. It is not that earlier 
worthies have not written commentaries, but they tend to be obscure, and latter-day 
adepts have difficulty understanding them.” Xue presents himself as one who, having 
received the “heart-seal transmission of the master,” is in charge of the Altar for the 
Manifestation of Thunder (xianlei tan II ft ill ). He hopes to earn merit and so to 
compensate for his own sins by writing as straightforward a commentary as possible. 
In point of fact, Xue’s commentary is comparatively unencumbered by esoteric read- 
ings and descriptions of the spiritual bureaucracy. 

A series of postfaces recount the circumstances surrounding the publication of 



[ 720 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [72/ ] 



Xue’s work. According to one Li Yueyang $ j=] also of Lushan and writing in 1305, 

Xue’s reticence to publish his commentary had been overcome: first by a local layman’s 
decision to finance the carving of the blocks, and then by the words of encouragement 
uttered by the divine Marshal Wang on the Thunder Altar of Anterior Heaven in West 
Market five days after the completion of the carving had been liturgically announced 
(3.i9a-2oa). In 1308, according to a postface by Xue (3.2oa-22a), he spent a night 
on this same altar. During the night, the “ancestral master” Lei Moan WiWtM (see 
article on 89 Tuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing tongyi) came to him in a dream 
with two announcements: first, that Xue’s name had been registered in the Shenxiao 
celestial offices because his “merit in explaining [the Duren jing] is equal to mine”; 
second, that a text was about to be revealed to him (this is presumably the heart-seal 
transmission mentioned in the preface). Eight days later, as predicted, a text is revealed 
to Xue by none other than Xin Zhongyi the divine Clerk of the Thunder Clap 

who had originally revealed to Lei Moan the Hunyuan M Jt Thunder rites (297 Lishi 
zhenxian tidao tongjian xubian 5.12b; cf. Boltz, A survey of Taoist literature, 47, 209-11). 
A final text, also by Xue, tells the history of the revelation and transmission of the 
“precious declaration of the Primordial Beginning,” a declaration that Xue wrote out 
on the Scriptural Altar of the Sea of Snow Heart-Mirror in 1316. 

The commentary produced in this context of dream revelation and automatic 
writing is anything but visionary. Indeed, Xue states explicitly that his commentary is 
intended for religious novices ( chuzhen dedao zhe ffl 08 ('fijt Ai, 2.24b; cf. 3.4b, 21b), 
whether or not they have received a ritual register ( falu 1.18a, based on 90 Tuan- 

shi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing neiyi , 2.31a). Xue simplifies the Duren jing, in part, 
as he explains in an undated postface (3.i8a-i9a), by going counter to contemporary 
practice and excluding the Lingshu xiapian MU TH and the Taiji zhenren houxu A 
More generally, he simply takes from his predecessors the bare min- 
imum of what he deems necessary for an understanding of the text. To this end, he 
borrows regularly from the commentaries of Guo Wangfeng [Sf JUS, and Li Shaowei 
He borrows from the former especially in juan 2 (cf. 2.3a on Kunlun with 88 
Tuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing zhu 2.9a), and from the latter primarily in 
juan 3 (from 87 Tuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing sizhu). He shares with Xiao 
Yingsou’s If UB H Neiyi both the mode of liturgical presentation and the zhifu OK 
(3.18a; 90 Miaojing neiyi 5.36a), and he alludes once to Shenxiao literature (2.29b). 

What is unique to Xue’s commentary is not only its relative simplicity, but also 
his references to the ritual context of the recitation of the Duren jing: where, for ex- 
ample, Yan Dong f§ Jft interprets the phrase “today there is the joy of transmission” 
as a reference to the transmission of the Duren jing to the Lord of the Tao by means 
ofYuanshi tianzun’s recitation as described in the text itself (87 Miaojing sizhu 2.58a), 
Xue interprets the phrase as a reference to a religious initiation: “today so-and-so is 
being initiated” (2.2ob-2ia). In similar fashion, astral bodies and other cosmic entities 



mentioned in the text are divinized and placed in a ritual context: the Southern Dip- 
per, for example, becomes “the lord who gives entry to life, and that is why one’s name 
of life is written on the Register of Long Life” (2.21b; compare 87 Sizhu 2.36b). 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao wuliang duren shangpin jingfa 

iiMSssasAia® 

5 juan 

Compiled and annotated by Chen Chunrong Southern Song (1127- 

1279)? 

93 (fasc. 47-48) 

“Scriptural Method of Book of Salvation.” By its very title this commentary on the 
Duren jing links itself to the Lingbao dafa movement \ jingfa (scriptural method) is an 

alternative name for this form of the “great method” 
(compare 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa, 
title and 71.23b). The text is preceded, in rather un- 
usual fashion, by a brief introduction to the rules of 
recitation, the cosmic origins of the text, and the salu- 
tary effect of its recitation. Nothing is known of the 
commentary’s author, Chen Chunrong, except that he 
was a Zhengyi priest, to judge by his title, given here 
as taishang sanwu dugong zhilu dizi A _h H E IP P] H 

Chen refers frequently to the “great method,” 
both to indicate the source (an &.) of his viewpoint 
(3.16b, 19a) and to tell the reader where to find further 
details (1.24a, 3.4a, 4-3b)- Most, though not all, of 
the citations attributed to the Master in the Beyond 
(xuanshi A (DU ) are to be found either in 219 Shangjing 
dafa or in 1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa (especially juan 
4, 10, and 26), or in both. Chen’s division of the 
Duren jing in forty-seven paragraphs is, with two 
exceptions, identical to the division in juan 26 of 
1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa , but it differs from that 
of Jin Yunzhong in juan 2 and 3 of 1223 Shangqing 
lingbao dafa. The similarity of the drawings on 1.5b, 
6a (fig. 4); 2.10b; 3.8b, 13a with those in juan 4 of 1221 
Shangqing lingbao dafa confirms the links of Chen’s 
commentary to the version of the Lingbao dafa that 
Jin Yunzhong associates with Tiantai. 






73 

— — — Toy 




figure 4. The correspondence 
between respiration and the 
circulation of qi, as measured 
through the pulse, and the 
movement of the “heavenly 
clockwork” of the Big Dipper 
stars (93 1. 6 a) 



[ 722 ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 

In addition to the Lingbao dafa texts and to the traditional commentaries compiled 
byCHEN Jingyuan (87 Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing sizbu) —whom he 
cites frequently, though sometimes implicitly— Chen Chunrong also uses an imperial 
commentary (probably that of Huizong; see VDL 134) and the Shenxiao writings 
(compare 2.47a— 50b and 3-2b-3b with 147 Lingbao wuliang duren shangbin miaojing 
futu 3.ia-ioa and I2a-i5b). For the Lingshu zhongpian M itf ^f - 1 IS (4-4b-29b), he uses 
the correspondences with the hexagrams found for the first time in Xiao Yingsou’s if 
f® S 90 Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing neiyi. It may be, however, that Chen 
took this part of his commentary not from Xiao but from Xiao’s source, for in the rest 
of his commentary, whenever Chen cites a passage that may be found in Xiao’s work, 
he almost invariably attributes it to a (Lingbao) neixiang danzhi (compare 

1.6a, 2.40b, 41b, and 44a with 90 Miaojing neiyi 1.12b, 3.39b, 40a, and 40b). 

John Lagerwey 

Dongxuan lingbao duren jing dafan yinyu shuyi 

22 fols. 

94 (fasc. 48) 

“Explanation Concerning the Esoteric Speech of Great Brahma [Dafan yinyu ], ” 
The title refers to the paragraph at the end of the Duren jing, which also constitutes 
the primary subject of 97 Taishang lingbao zhutian neiyin ziran yuzi. This paragraph 
consists of 256 characters, a number corresponding to that of the Thirty- two Heavens 
multiplied by eight. The paragraph was singled out for special attention in the Shen- 
xiao and Lingbao dafa traditions of the Southern Song. It is likely that the present 
text was transmitted separately for that reason (cf. the warning against “divulging [the 
esoteric sounds] to lay people” in 1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa 26.26b). 

In addition to separate paragraphs of explanation for each of the Thirty-two Heav- 
ens, all of which essentially reproduce Li Shaowei’s commentary, this text 

contains three introductory and two concluding paragraphs: the former explain the 
terms zhutian dafan If yinyu g|fg, and wuliang MSt; the latter explain the 

final paragraph of the Duren jing as a postface to the “esoteric sounds.” It is notewor- 
thy that this text devoted to the Sanskrit-like quality of the sounds nonetheless insists 
that they were Chinese (ib, 20b). 



John Lagerwey 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 723 ] 

Wuliang duren shangpin miaojing pangtong tu MMIm. kf.aa^S'M^ MM 

2 juan 

Compiled by Liu Yuandao hao Shouyi dashi yf — 

148 (fasc. 67) 

“Chart for Analyzing the Wonderful and Superior Book of Salvation.” The term 
pangtong in the tide— meaning “penetrating to the very limit” and, hence, “thorough 
analysis”— is borrowed from Yijing studies, where it refers to the analysis of a hexa- 
gram as a whole. The present text was originally in three juan, but the first juan is 
lost. 

According to the biography of Liu Yuandao in LZTT 5i.4b-5a, he was associated 
from the beginning with Emperor Huizong’s project for the compilation of a Dao- 
zang. His vast book learning earned him a series of promotions, and finally he was 
appointed head of the Taoists in the capital. It is undoubtedly at this time that he lived 
at the Taiqing chuqing gong llll? (see 1.1a) and compiled the present text. 

Relying heavily on the commentaries compiled by Chen Jingyuan (87 Yuanshi 
wuliang duren shangpin miaojing sizhu), Liu Yuandao attempts, in juan 2, primarily to 
link the Thirty-two Heavens of the Duren jing to the Twenty-eight Stellar Mansions. 
In juan 3, he describes the ritual for the recitation of the Duren jing and the Dafan yin- 
yu & text found both in the Duren jing and in 97 Taishang lingbao zhutian 

neiyin ziran yuzi. Liu also describes the celestial origins of these two texts. 

Liu not only notes the source of his comments in virtually every paragraph, but 
also provides a list of his sources at the end of his work. The authors of 219 Lingbao 
wuliang duren shangjing dafa and 1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa make considerable use 
of Liu’s work, but they eliminate all source references (compare the present work 
2.ia-8a and 1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa io.nb-i3a, i5b-25b; also 3. ia-7b and 219 Duren 
dafa 3.i3b-i7a, 22a-23b, 2.8a-9b). Jin Yunzhong was no doubt thinking of these 
imitators when he wrote that “irresponsible people have recently borrowed from such 
books as the Pangtong tu the Wuweijing and the Beidou lu 

and, after completely changing the names, have fabricated the Xuanji method 
$c” ( 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 27.10b). 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang shengxuan shuo xiaozai burning miaojing zhu 

12 fols. 

By Wang Jie Iff), zi Daoyuan JUjjfK, hao Hunran zi Yuan (1279-1368) 

100 (fasc. 50) 

“Commentary on the Marvelous Scripture of the Most High Elevation to Mystery 
Protecting Life and Averting Disaster.” In the main part of his commentary, Wang 




[ 724 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 

Jie explains the words and the reasoning of the text without pursuing a systematic 
exegesis. His definition of key terms to some extent alters the fundamental message 
of the scripture, replacing an epistemological sequence— the experience of reality, the 
unreal nature of this reality, the identity of both perceptions and the ultimate reality 
of the marvelous sounds” — with ontological dialectics. This shift appears to be due 
to the influence of the Neo-Confucian dialectics of “substance” as opposed to “func- 
tion” (see page 6a). Another influence may be attributable to the author’s alchemical 
preoccupations. Apparently taking as a point of departure the suggestion of an esoteric 
meaning of the text made by Li Daochun in ioi Taishang shengxuan xiaozai burning 
miaojing zhu 2a (compare our text ib), Wang contrasts this interpretation, to which 
he gives the name of “the use of the Tao” (daoyong ), with a religious and literal 
interpretation that he terms the “method of the age” ( shifa ift see pages 2a, 3a, and 

10b; cf. the article on 91 Taishang dongxuan lingbao wulicmg duren shangpin miaojing 
zhujie). The alchemical terminology used by Wang is that of the Quanzhen school 
^ flS (compare ioa6 in the present text to 2s Tuanshi tianzun shuo dedao liaoshen jing 
laio). 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang shengxuan xiaozai burning miaojing zhu 
5 fols. 

By Li Daochun (d. 1306) 

101 (fasc. 50) 

“Commentary on the Marvelous Scripture of the Most High Elevation to Mystery 
Protecting Life and Averting Disaster.” In comparison with the standard versions of 
the scripture, as given in 19 Taishang shengxuan xiaozai burning miaojing and in the 
Dunhuang manuscripts, we find here, on page 4a, an additional phrase of four char- 
acters: suishengongyang if JJ f* §g, that is, “worship wherever you are.” 

Li Daochun’s commentary is divided into three parts. It proposes an alchemical 
interpretation of the text. The Yuanshi tianzun symbolizes the ancestral qi, and the 
Palace of Five Colors where he preaches is equated with the Yellow Court (huangting 
MM), whereas the Forest of the Seven Jewels is said to refer to the Three Origins 
( sanyuan Htc) and the Four Emblems ( sixiang 0 ^ ). In the second part of his com- 
mentary, Li Daochun quotes the Hrddya-sutra (Xinjing DIM). 



Catherine Despeux 



3 .A. 1 Philosophy [ 72s ] 



Shengtian jing songjie ^ 

6 fols. 

By Wang Jichang j£ ej H, hao Chaoran zi early thirteenth century 

313 (fasc. 162) 

“Hymns in Exegesis of the Book of Birth in Heaven.” This work comprises thirty- 
seven poems explaining and expanding upon the meaning of the short Tang scripture 
24 Tuanshi tianzun shuo shengtian dedao jing. The general tenor of the commentary 
is that of spiritual alchemy, in keeping with the teachings of Wang, the author of 247 
Huizhenji. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Dongxuan lingbao ziran jiutian shengshen zhang jing jieyi 

4 juan 

By Dong Sijing H Jj§ yft , hao Guishan il |JLl ; 1252 

396 (fasc. 186) 

“Commentary on the Stanzas of the Life Spirits of the Nine Heavens.” In the pref- 
ace, Dong, a Taoist from the Tianqing monastery at Qingyuan '/(tilS (Shanxi), 

divides the text according to its contents and gives explanations regarding the five 
kalpas and the Nine Heavens on the basis of numerical correspondences. 

In his postface, dated 1252, Dong Sijing presents a discourse in which he convinces 
a skeptic of the contents of this scripture and the Taoist teaching. In his explanations, 
Dong refers to a great number of Shangqing and Lingbao scriptures and cites a total of 
seven different editions of the Jiutian shengshen zhang jing fi . 'fe ft{3 If? (3.ia-29a), 

of which only the commentary from Sichuan ( Shuzhu |§j IF ; i . e . , 397 Dongxuan lingbao 
ziran jiutian shengshen yuzhang jing jie) can be identified. 

Zhang Yuchu’s (1361-1410) preface to Dong’s commentary can be found in 

1311 Xianquan ji 2.i7a-i9a. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Dongxuan lingbao ziran jiutian shengshen yuzhang jing jie 

3 juan 

By Wang Xichao Ti # ^4 , zi Yinxian R If ; 1205 

397 (fasc. 187) 

“Explanations of the Stanzas of the Life Spirits of the Nine Heavens.” As Wang Xi- 
chao — a Taoist from the Chongxu monastery j'f 1 lm ® in Mianzhou ^ JH (Sichuan) — 
states in his preface (dated 1205), he wrote this commentary at the suggestion of a 




[ 726 ] 3. A. 1 Philosophy 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 727 ] 



certain Ren Xianliang {L ff , who deemed the previous explanations by Yuchan zi 
J (surnamed Zhao @ ) to be incomplete. 

Wang’s commentary is unusually detailed and precise in its textual criticism (e.g., 
i.5b-6b). The two hymns by Taiji zhenren at the end of this text are left 

uncommentated. 

In his supplement to the Junzhai dushu zhi, Zhao Xibian lists a Jiutian shengshen 
zhang jing in three juan, with explanations by Wang Xichao, a preface by Cheng Gong- 
xu (A. 1211), and a colophon by Zhao Rixiu |§ 0 Neither that preface nor 

the colophon are reproduced in the present edition. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Dongxuan lingbao ziran jiutian shengshen zhang jingzhu 

3 juan 

By Hua Yangfii IjiRifJI; preface by Zhang Shouqing ‘JgyFyf , dated 1332 

398 (fasc. 188) 

“Commentary on the Stanzas of the Life Spirits of the Nine Heavens.” Nothing 
is known about Hua Yangfii except that it can be concluded from his work (i.^-bj) 
that he lived under the Yuan dynasty (1279-1368). The preface to this commetary was 
written by Zhang Shouqing, a Taoist residing on Wudangshan^'g’lij (Hubei). 
Zhang had been active establishing temples there as early as 1284. His title, Tixuan 
miaoying taihe zhenren fi £ M X fW R X , which he uses in the preface, had been 
bestowed on him by the emperor in 1314 {962 Wudang fudi zongzhenji 2.1b; 96iXuan- 
tian shangdi qisheng lingyi lu 6a). Zhang regrets that he knew the old Tang commen- 
taries by Xue Youqi Li Shaowei and Cheng Xuanying only by 

hearsay and states that he was shown Hua’s commentary by a visitor from Wu i?|. 

Hua’s commentary is by no means original; it draws heavily on the explanations 
by Wang Xichao 3 :# M (compare, e.g., i.i2b-i4b with 397 Dongxuan lingbao ziran 
jiutian shengshen yuzhang jing jie i.22b-26a) and frequently cites commentaries by 
Xiao Zhenyou M R-te and Zhen Shuai that otherwise have not been preserved. 
Appended to the text we find a folio of phonetic explanations. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 



Taishang dongxuan lingbao tianzun shuojiuku miaojing zhujie 
27 fols. 

By [Lii 5 ] Dongyang zi ofTongshen an preface by Zhou Zhun 

Ji] , hao Baozhen zi ^ jH 
399 (fasc. 189) 

“Annotations to the Scripture for the Salvation from Distress.” This commentary 
on 374 Taishang dongxuan lingbao jiuku miaojing is preceded by a preface by a certain 
Zhou Zhun of Jinjiang (Shangrao ±M district, Jiangxi), in which we learn 
that Dongyang zi was the hao of a Mr. Lii S J 5 ; of Siming |Z 3 fjfj , a mountain range in 
Zhejiang. Lii announces to Zhou his intention to write a commentary on the Jiuku 
jing which, he says, contains “the secret meaning of the Great Cavern.” 

Lii, citing S29 Lingbao imjing tigang , defines the Jiuku jing as an “esoteric expose of 
sublimation [liandu M ® ] rites” (17b). Salvation by sublimation is to be accomplished 
by “setting fire” ( xinghuo fj'X)to the sanmei H , that is, by the “fires of the lord (the 
heart), the minister (the kidneys), and the people (the bladder)” (24a; cf. 263 Xiuzhen 
shishu 15.1b, 3a). Lii identifies the Taoists’ “primordial spirit” with the “true nature” of 
the Confucians and the “origin” ( benlai $ 5 ) 5 ) of the Buddhists (2a). The ling M of 
Lingbao is identical with the spirit ( shen |$) and the nature (xing ; ['(fe), and the boo ff 
with the breath (qi) and life (ming op; 4b-sb). Adepts of Chan understand the heart 
and the nature but are too much “attached to their discourses on Emptiness” (10b). 
One must also create the Lords of the Three Treasures by transforming the qi, the 
spirit, and the essence (Jing iff; 13a). 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang shengxuan xiaozai burning miaojing song 
7 fols. 

By Zhang Bo M fi , zi Xubo /£ E=J , hao Boyun zi E=| fU -p (fl. second half of tenth 
century) 

312 (fasc. 161) 

“Hymns on the Marvelous Scripture of the Most High Elevation to Mystery Pro- 
tecting Life and Averting Disaster.” This is a rhymed commentary to the Tang scripture 
19 Taishang shengxuan xiaozai burning miaojing. The Daozang edition indicates Zhenyi 
xiansheng Sima Ziwei M. — of the Tang as the author of this work, 

referring to Sima Chengzhen (647-735). This attribution is an error. According to 
the biography of Zhang Bo in LZIT 47.15a, the latter wrote a rhymed commentary on 
the work in question. The biography quotes the first and last lines of this commentary, 
showing clearly that it corresponded to the present text. The confusion with Sima 



[ 72« ] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 



3 .A .1 Philosophy [ 729 ] 



Chengzhen may have resulted from the fact that both he and Zhang Bo had the 
hao Boyun zi. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjingjing zhu 

7 fols. 

By Li Daochun hao Qing’an '/if M, Yingchan zi (fl. 1290) 

755 (fasc. 532) 

“Commentary to the Scripture on Perpetual Purity and Tranquility.” For biographi- 
cal details about the Quanzhen ^ R Taoist Li Daochun, see 1060 Qing’an Yingchan 
ziyulu. The main part of the present text is identical with 620 Taishang laojun shuo chang 
qingjing miaojing ; the latter’s epilogue, however, has not been included here. In his 
exegesis, Li mostly limits himself to strict textual interpretation, citing only occasion- 
ally the Daodejing and Yijing for explanation. 

Htms-Hermann Schmidt 

Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjingjing zhu S 1$ ^ If £? If 

63 fols. 

Yuan (1279-1368)? 

756 (fasc. 532) 

“Commentary on the Scripture of Perpetual Purity and Tranquility.” This anony- 
mous commentary probably dates from the Yuan dynasty (see 60a: “Earlier, in the year 
1068 of the Song ...”). Compared to 620 Taishang laojun shiw chang qingjing miaojing , 
the main text of the present work has been abridged by more than one third: pages ibio- 
2a8 of that text are missing here, as is the epilogue. After the individual sections of the 
text, the commentator first gives his own explanations and often cites commentaries 
on the Qingjing jing by Wenzhong zi and Boyun weng (not identi- 

fied). Then— without indicating his sources— he narrates stories that illustrate the 
efficacy of the recitation of this scripture. He goes on to summarize in a final remark 
(lun Im ) the relation between the individual episode and the preceding section of the 
text. As for the sources of the stories that can be traced, they are mostly Tang works 
like the Fayuan zhulin the Baoyingji and the Guangyiji JUJUS 

that attest to the efficacy of the Diamond Sutra (Jin’gang jing ^p5)lj [M?=r] M . ). Our 
commentator in some places remained faithful to the original story (compare, e.g., 5b 
with Baoyingji [in Taipingguangji 103.695], but sometimes he modified them heavily, 
to the point of changing the names of the protagonists (compare, e.g., 52b-58b with 
XuxuanguailuWl^ [in Taipingguangji 16. 109-12]. In all cases, the tide Jin’gang 
jing has been replaced by Qingjing jing yjf If $S. 



Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing jing zhu Jil._h.Tits i5£ ill If I? if 

24 fols. 

Arranged and revised by Bo Yuchan E=| 3i£fl, hao Qiongguan zi 1® % f", 

commentary by Wang Yuanhui T TTtUji . hao Yinwei zi , dated 1312 

757 (fasc. 532) 

“Commentary on the Scripture of Perpetual Purity and Tranquility.” In a brief post- 
face, Wang Daxu ( hao Gouqu shanren frJffilllA) writes that he came into 

possession of a Qingjing jing — commentated by Sima Chengzhen and divided 
into sections and revised by Bo Yuchan — and that he was preparing to have the 
work printed. Jiang Huazi k M ¥ {hao Siqing weng 0 ff 0 S ) confirms in his preface 
(dated 1312) that the diagrams at the beginning of the text are by Bo Yuchan. Since 
no explicit information on the commentary nor on the identity of Wang Yuanhui 
(from Zhongnan £gj$j) is given, we can only assume that Yuanhui is the zi of Wang 
Daxu. 

Our main text, divided into five sections, is the same as 620 Taishang laojun shuo 
chang qingjing miaojing , the epilogue of which has been compiled here with an ac- 
count of Laozi’s incarnations and manifestations, the diagrams by Bo Yuchan, and 
various poems to form a separate prolegomenon. The commentary is mainly a con- 
glomeration of citations from all kinds of sources. Variant readings are indicated. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjingjing zhu ic Jl ^ ft ^ iW irf I? if 

24 fols. 

By Hou Shanyuan &WM-,hao Taixuan ( Jin dynasty, second half of 

twelfth century); preface by Mao Hui Q.M (fl. 1187) 

758 (fasc. 533) 

“Commentary on the Scripture of Perpetual Purity and Tranquility.” From the pref- 
ace by Mao Hui (cf. “Yizhen chongxu zhenren Mao zunshi tuihua ming,” 973 Ganshui 
xianyuan lu 7.6b), we can conclude that Mao and Hou were contemporaries. The text 
itself links the place name Gushe shan Lti (Shanxi) to the commentator’s name, 
whereas according to Mao Hui, Hou lived on Lishan |R UU (Shaanxi). 

In comparison to 620 Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing miaojing , the present main 
text shows only a few minor differences. Usually the commentary limits itself to a terse 
paraphrase of the individual paragraphs, followed by a hymn in eight five- character 
verses. The epilogue is not commentated. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 



Hans-Hermann Schmidt 




[ 730 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing miaojing zuantu jiezhu 

23 fols. 

By Wang Jie zi Daoyuan hao Hunran zi (first half of 

fourteenth century) 

760 (fasc. 533) 

“Explanations and Commentary with Illustrations to the Wonderful Scripture on 
Perpetual Purity and Tranquility.” The present main text is the same as 620 Taishang 
laojun shuo chang qingjing miaojing. The Eulogies of the Zhenren (“Zhenren zan OK 
A IS”) form a separate epilogue here. 

In his commentary, Wan g J i e presents himself as an adherent of the Quanzhen ^ 
[JJ tradition by citing Taoist, Buddhist, and Confucian works, by depicting the Three 
Teachings on a par with each other in a diagram (12b), and by postulating the cultiva- 
tion of one’s nature (xing ft ) and physical existence ( ming np; 13b; 23a). Interspersed, 
we find references to Inner Alchemy. Each commentated section is supplemented by 
a diagram, illustrating the interrelations and interdependences of the definitions and 
terms employed. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing jing songzhu A A ^ ^ if §¥ M £§ If 

8 fols. 

By LiuTongwei M'MW, hao Moran zi if ft -p (1167-1196) 

974 (fasc. 614) 

“Psalmodic Commentary on the Scripture of Perpetual Purity and Tranquility.” The 
author, who signed this commentary only with his byname, was a ^ jj| Quanzhen 
Taoist. According to oss Zhongnan shan zuting xianzhen neizhuan i.4a-5b, Liu was a 
native ofYecheng MM in Shandong. In 1167 he met Wang Zhe there, from whom 
he also received his byname. After meetings with four of Wang’s disciples, Liu was 
summoned, at the beginning of the Mingchang period (1190-1196), to the Jin court, 
where he conversed with the emperor Zhangzong on Taoist themes (among others, 
qingjing fit If ). He died in 1196, not long after leaving the court. The present work is 
not mentioned in his biography. 

The main text has similar variant characters as 738 Taishang laojun shuo chang qing- 
jing jing zhu; the epilogue, however, is missing in our work. Liu’s hymns consist of 
eight five-character verses each, which are more in the nature of a poetic paraphrase 
of the main text than an explanatory commentary. 



Hans-Hermann Schmidt 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 7}J ] 

Taishang taiqing tiantong burning miaojing zhu AAAifAjSISnnfeW-Ii 
10 fols. 

By Hou Shanyuan { %WM,hao Taixuan zi A A i 1 ; Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) 

762 (fasc. 533) 

“Annotations to the Life-Protecting Book of the Heavenly Lords of Utmost Purity.” 
This short commentary on 632 Taishang taiqing tiantong burning miaojing is similar in 
form to Hou’s commentary 7S8 Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing jing zhu. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang kaiming tiandi benzhen jing AAPWAft^Sf? 

4 fols. 

Transmitted by Renshou, Meishan Master Who Penetrates the Mystery of the 
Three Teachings 
34 (fasc. 27) 

“Explication of the Most High of the Original Truth of Heaven and Earth.” 
After stating that humanity lost its “original truth” in the Tao by the development 
of knowledge, the author explains the birth of the Three Teachings ( sanjiao jr.^0 
as a response to this situation. Each has its special area of competence— morality, 
dialectics, alchemy (note the use of the term gongfu p] A) — but each “embraces 
heaven and earth” in its teaching. Nowadays, regrettably, these Three Teachings have 
lost their original truth. It is therefore the task of those who would “penetrate the 
Mystery of the Three Teachings ” to explain ( kaiming Iff] ), out of compassion for 
the living and the dead, that there is no Heaven higher than human nature (xing ft), 
nor an Earth more stable than the human heart. All paths to salvation depend on the 
body, but in order to recover the “true origin,” one must “recite the True Book that 
is hidden from human eyes.” In other words, one must find a “superior man” who 
can teach one “the way of the scriptures,” for “it is necessary to know that the True 
Book of the Great Way depends on oral transmission and the seal of the heart [xinyin 

AW 

John Lqgerwey 

Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansheng zhenjing zhu 

A±£B;li:4*ffrg£R«f£ 

5 juan 

By Xu Daoling ft Http, hao Xuanyang zi corrected by Xu Daoxuan ft M 

£, hao Qianyang zi ?£|?§ A ; 1334 
750 (fasc. 527-528) 

“Commentary on the Dipper Scripture.” According to his postface, written on the 
occasion of the printing of this work in 1334, Xu Daoling composed this text in divine 




[ 732 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 733 ] 



inspiration while occupying a sinecure post in Suzhou. Concerning Xu Daoxuan, the 
corrector, no information is provided. 

Although Xu Daoling states that he relied on the “instructions of previous sages,” 
he does not specify any particular text model. Numerous parallels, however, point to 
7S2 Taishang xuanling beidou beriming yansbeng jmg zhu (q.v.) as a possible source. 

One of the characteristics of the present work is its obvious relation to the spirit- 
writing cult of Zitong dijun 'S'lt : a prefatory note (Beidou jing tici 4 L 4 $35 SI 
jf$) and a petition to the Jade Emperor (j.ia-2a) are attributed to this deity. Text and 
commentary are thus set in a ritual frame: the prefatory note gives instructions for 
the visualization of the deities of the Big Dipper to be practiced before the recita- 
tion of the scripture, and for the prayers to be pronounced at the beginning of the 
ritual. More formulas and a series of ten benedictions come after the text (4.i?b-i7b). 
Juan 5 includes, after Zitong dijun’s petition and some technical instructions, a set 
of fu that stand for the individual deities of the constellation (cf. 7S2 Beidou benming 
yansbeng jing zhu 2.9b-i9a) and for certain parts of the scripture itself (4.na-i2b; 
2.ia-9b). 

Xu Daoling, who tries to give the Beidou jing a valid position within the Three 
Teachings, frequently refers in his commentary to Buddhist and Confucian sources 
(e.g., Jin’gang jing #4 Sishier zhang jing, Mengzi Sift, Daxue). As for Taoist 
sources, he clearly prefers 16 Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun yushu baojing, 
but he also cites 623 Taishang xuanling beidou benming changsheng miaojing (2.13a), 10 
Gaoshang yuhuang benxing jijing (4b), and others. 

Xu attempts to interpret from an exalted view of self-cultivation several passages of 
the main text that originally dealt only with conditions of everyday life in the home. 
The main text sometimes has variant readings (compare, e.g., 2.9b3, 2.9b8, and 4.ioai 
with 622 Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansbeng zhenjing 3b5-6, 8a9). 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansbeng zhenjing zhujie 

3 juan 

By Xuanyuan zhenren % jt R A from Kongtong shan ill 

751 (fasc. 528) 

“Commentary on the Dipper Scripture.” This commentary on 622 Taishang xuan- 
ling beidou benming yansbeng zhenjing is by an unknown author with the byname 
Xuanyuan from Kongtong; it is accompanied by a preface attributed to Li Bo ^ 
S (701-762) and a postface signed “Su Shi If ti” (1036-1101). These attributes may 
indicate a connection with a spirit-writing cult. 



In the work itself, we find a single instance (i.i8b-i9a) of a parallel to Xu Daoling’s 
(A- 1334) commentary in 750 Tai shang xuanling beidou benming yansbeng zhen- 
jing zhu i.23b-24a. This parallel could, however, derive from a common source. 

In his commentary, Xuanyuan zhenren establishes a threefold division of the in- 
dividual paragraphs: (1) a tersely phrased explanation that remains close to the main 
text, followed by (2) a comprehensive, easily understandable interpretation (dazhong 
which is then completed by (3) a hymn comprising eight seven-character verses 
and resuming the theme metaphorically. 

We also find fu in this text (2.nb-i5b), corresponding to those in Xu Daoling’s 
commentary (5.3b-6b) as well as to those in Fu Dongzhen’s fUMR (7S2 Taishang 
xuanling beidou benming yansbeng jing zhu 2.9b-i9a), along with figurative depictions 
of the astral deities. 

The commentator, who relies mainly on the authority of the 620 Taishang laojun 
shuo chang qingjing miaojing and 31 Huangdi yinfu jing, advocates the concept of the 
Three Teachings ( sanjiao H ; i.ioa-b) and the graded teaching in the Three Vehicles 
(sancheng Hffl; 2.23b). The action of the Beidou 4L4 as a universal regulator of 
cosmic events stands as a paradigm for the Tao or the Void “lying before one’s eyes,” 
as well as existing within humanity itself (2.ia-2a). Through continued meditation 
(2.29b), introspective contemplation of the mind (xin ft", i.e., Beidou), shutting one- 
self off from the illusory exterior world (1.17a), and restraining the Horse of the Will 
(yima MMj) and the Monkey of the Mind (xinyuan ft Jjt; e.g., 3.2b), the practitioner 
finally achieves sudden enlightenment ( dunwu WHa', e.g., 1.8a), realizing the true void 
of the great Tao (2.30a). The principle of true nature (xing ft) is rated higher than 
life, with its span limited by time (ming bit ; 1.16b). Allusions to neidan ft) ft practices 
(e.g., 1.15a) are mostly metaphorical. 

The style is rhetorical, reminiscent of the genre of recorded conversations ( yulu 
it ), and the phrasing is poetic and metaphorical. 

The prevalence of Chan ideas suggests that the commentary was produced among 
the later Quanzhen Taoists, who understood their tradition as a synthesis of the 
so-called Northern and Southern schools. The formal terminological and stylistic 
similarities with a text like 10 6s Xuanjiao dagongan should also be pointed out in this 
context. 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 



[734-] 3 .A .1 Philosophy 

Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansheng jing zhu 

3 juan 

By Fu Dongzhen {H [pH [Jt 

752 (fasc. 529) 

Beidou qiyuan jinxuan yuzhang 4fc4"fc7C^z2C^l3fS 

Appendix to 7x2 Yansheng jing zhu 

9 fols. 

753 (fasc. 529) 

“Commentary on the Dipper Scripture.” Fu Dongzhen, who is otherwise un- 
known, intended his commentary on 622 Taishang xuanling beidou beriming yansheng 
zhenjing to serve as a vindication for that popular scripture. Because of its parallel style, 
the Beidou jing was often considered a forgery, by either Du Guangting or Zhang 
Daoling !*Rjlil§t, rather than a revelation. It was, moreover, decried as trivial. On the 
basis of the teachings of the scriptures and statements by earlier masters, Fu wanted 
to elucidate the Beidou jing and prove the deeper meaning of its simple words (see the 
preface). 

Fu’s commentary is probably later than the Song (960-1279; 2.25b). It is quoted in 
Chen Zhong’s commentary in 7 S4 Taishang shuo Xuantian dasheng zhenwu benchuan 
shenzhou miaojing 2.8a. Furthermore, both citations of a Doujing shi in 104.9 

Yungong fayu 2.1b (preface dated 1298) correspond, in slightly modified form, to 
3.i2a-b and 3.7b, respectively, of the present work, which was probably also one of the 
sources for Xu Daoling’s fzfciMKn commentary in 750 Taishang xuanling beidou benming 
yansheng zhenjing zhu. 

A general characteristic of Fu’s commentary is the author’s high degree of technical 
knowledge about liturgical practice and divinatory calculation. Although he also uses 
some Buddhist terms— the origin of which he traces back to the Huahu theory— on a 
philosophical level, he rarely refers to Buddhist or Confucian works (for an exception, 
see 2.1a). As basic Taoist writings, he names 641 Taishang laojun neiguanjing, 400 Dong- 
xuan lingbao dingguan jing, 620 Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing miaojing , and 1036 
Zuowang lun. Another important source was a Pangtong tu^'M ID , i.e., probably the 
Beidou (or -di) qiyuan shengwei pangtong tu 4L4 ('Sr) MM ■ This work 

may have been the focus for the so-called xuanling 2 M or xuanji 2f?l methods, to 
which Fu alludes repeatedly (see also 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa , preface 6b, 10.7b). 

The numerous interspersed textual criticisms (e.g., 2.28a) show that Fu had com- 
pared different versions of the main text. 

The appendix, 7X3 Beidou qiyuan jinxuan yuzhang (Winged Stanzas on the Golden 
Mystery), contains seven stanzas addressed to the seven primary stars of the Beidou 



3 . A. 1 Philosophy [ 73s ] 

and the talismans pertaining to them (cf. 1224 Daomen dingzhi 8.i7b-2ia). It also 
contains rules for sacrifices to the individual stars of fate, and further ritual recom- 
mendations and explanations related to the recitation of th t Beidou jing. Incidentally, 
the instructions concerning the accompanying visualization are clearly similar to the 
method of meditation described in 466 Lingbao lingjiaojidujinshu 285.1a under the tide 
Xuanling mochao neisong 2 M Sk ft 11 . 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

Beidou qiyuan jinxuan yuzhang 4 t 7C 2 ^ M 

3 fols. 

975 (fasc. 614) 

“Winged Stanzas on the Golden Mystery.” Although not direcdy related in con- 
tents, the present text may have originally formed an appendix to the hymns to the 
Qingjing jing by Liu Tongwei (974 Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing jing 

songzhu). It contains the same hymns as those found in 7x3 Beidou qiyuan jinxuan yu- 
zhang. 

The tide is borrowed from Shangqing literature, where it signifies the songs or 
prayers to be intoned against the temptations of the demon rulers from the eight direc- 
tions (see 1358 Shangqing gaoshang jinyuan yuzhang yuqing yinshu jing 9b-i7b). In the 
present text, hymns of the same title describe the specific characteristics and functions 
of the individual stars of the Big Dipper. The prayers addressed to the seven primary 
stars are also found, mutatis mutandis, in 1224 Daomen dingzhi 8.i7b-2ia as citations 
from a Beidou jinxuan yuzhang Our text, however, comprises nine 

stanzas, of which the last two, songs addressed to the accompanying stars Fu ij$j and 
Bi ?$}, may be later additions. The fu provided by 1224 Daomen dingzhi in this context 
are missing here. 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

3. A. I.e Treatises and Essays 

Taishang xiuzhen tiyuan miaodao jing 2 _h 01 SI Ft & it IS 

21 fols. 

Revealed to Liu Yuanrui glj 7t ; colophon by Dong Zhengguan MlEtS, dated 

1261 

41 (fasc. 29) 

“Most Fligh Scripture of the Marvelous Way of Incarnation of the Origin for 
the Cultivation of the True [Self].” In his colophon, Dong Zhengguan relates that a 
deity named Yuansu zhenjun —Lord of the Teaching of the Holy Thunder 

Mountain of the Ultimate North (Beiji leiyue jiaozu 4tli11r®($[2) and incarnation 



1 







[ 736 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 

of the [Lord of the] Gold Portal (Jinque huashen & ) — revealed the present 

scripture to an adept named Liu Yuanrui by means of “descending into the brush” 
(jiangbi ), that is, spirit- writing. Liu refused to divulge the text— in the last para- 
graph of the scripture, the deity enjoins Liu not to show it to unworthy people— and 
thus it was only after his death that Dong could obtain a copy and print it. 

The scripture is divided into twenty-four sections, each of which ends with a short, 
rhymed abstract (jue ). The deity teaches those who “seek to perfect themselves” the 
“marvelous way of incarnation of the origin.” In the beginning, the Tao was without 
words (page ia) and the body of the universe was “pure yin” ( chunyin Ml^ ; 3b). The 
image of this pristine perfection is the child who “in triple silence follows the body” of 
its mother and breathes in harmony with her respiration (8b-9a). This silence is triple 
because the qi of Heaven, Earth, and humanity intermingle in it (him zhi (§,£). One 
must therefore forget all distinctions and return to the Primordial Chaos ( hundun jfl 

; 13a). One should no longer be preoccupied with the dragon or the tiger, with lead 
or mercury, and even less with offerings (14a and 17b). One has only to “Hold the 
One” (13b and 15a), and thus, as said on 15b and 19b, “one can tally without fu” (bufu 
er kefu T' M Pi" ) and command [the spirits] without spells (bu zhou er ke zhu T' 

John Lagerwey 

Jindan fu p} K 

47 fols. 

Commentary by Ma Lizhao M Si 0 p ; Yuan (1279-1368) 

261 (fasc. 121) 

“Ode on the Gold-Elixir.” This work is a counterpart to the Neidanfu by Tao Zhi 
(cf. 2S9 Too zhenren neidanfu). The commentator, Ma Lizhao, who refers to himself as 
a disciple of the Great Tao ^ -jp , presumably lived during the Yuan period, as he 

writes: “Since Jin, Tang, and Song times If Hf ...” (preface, ia). 

According to the preface (ib), Ma’s copy of the Jindan fu lacked any indication as 
to the work’s authorship, and since Ma does not mention any older commentaries, it 
is likely that he simply possessed the poem. 

Ma’s interpretation of the Jindan fu is philosophical in nature and gready influenced 
by the works of the Tang Taoist Wu Yun. He discourses on the Tao, the interaction 
of yin and yang, and the universal order, with examples from the Tying, and from the 
Xuangang lun JjMmi and other philosophical treatises by Wu Yun. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



3. A. I Philosophy [ 737 ] 

Qianyuan zi sanshi lun 
3 fols. 

268 (fasc. 132) 

“Master Qianyuan’s Discourse on the Three Beginnings.” This is a short treatise of 
unknown date. The name “Qianyuan zi” is based on that of a celestial immortal (tian- 
xian ^ fill ), master of one of Chisong zi’s teachers (cf. 883 Taiqingjing tianshi 

koujue 5b). The treatise comprises four short paragraphs: in this text, taiyi JF. J n (Great 
Change) is considered the equivalent of hundun (Chaos); Taichu JfJf] (Great 

Beginning), Taishi (Great Commencement), and Taisu jsl M (Great Simplicity) 
are the beginning of qi, xing fy (form), and zhi ff (matter), respectively. The author 
was directly inspired by a Han apocryphal text (thcQianzuo du and the first 

chapter of the Liezi flj -p . 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Wushang miaodao wenshi zhenjing I® _h Jit fC. 

36 fols. 

Twelfth century 
667 (fasc. 347) 

‘True Scripture of Wenshi.” The title is derived from the byname Wenshi xiansheng 
for the Guardian of the Pass, Yin Xi T ^ , to whom this work is attrib- 
uted. Although a Guanyin zi H ^ -p in nine pian M is 
listed already in the bibliographic chapters of the Han shu 
30.1730, the existence of the present text is not attested be- 
fore the early Southern Song period (1127-1279). The first 
bibliographic mention of the text that has come down to 
us is found in Suichu tang shumu 23b. According to Zhizhai 
shulujieti 9.288, Xu Zang (p f§s (var. Chan M , zi Zili -p Iff ; 
fl. 1167) received this text from Sun Ding of Yongjia 
zKH (Zhejiang). Thereafter the Guanyin zi seems to have 
circulated widely within a short time, as can be seen from 
citations in 90 Tuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing 
neiyi 1.7a; 4.21a. 

In the Quanzhen tradition, the year 1233 is celebrated as 
the date when the text, lost for more than one thousand 
years, reappeared and came again into the hands of a de- 
scendant of the Yin clan. In that year, it was brought by a 
certain Zhang Zhongcai who had obtained it in 

Zhejiang, to the patriarch Yin Zhiping ffp- on Zhong- 
nan shan j^f [JL[ , the ancient dwelling place of Yin Xi (see 




I 



figure 5. Portrait of Yin 
Xi (667 ia). Ming reprint 
of 1598. Courtesy of the 
Bibliotheque nationale de 
France. (Chinois 9546/662) 







f 738 ] 3. A. 1 Philosophy 

“Da Yuan chongxiu gu Louguan zongsheng gongji,” 957 Gu Louguan ziyun yanqing ji 
i.ija-b). In his chronicle about the appearance of the Guanyin zi (cf. 728 Wenshi zhen- 
jing yanwai zbi ), Zhu Xiangxian states in 1281 that on the occasion of the print- 

ing of the Daozang , Huizong had ordered a search for Taoist texts, which produced 
no copy of the Guanyin zi. Only when the Taoist canon was newly edited under Song 
Defang was the work included in the library under the tide Wenshi zhenjing. 

The present work is preceded by a brief biography and a depiction of Yin Xi (fig. 
5), both derived from 163 Xuanyuan shizi tu. The same arrangement is also found with 
the texts of Zhuangzi and Liezi. Moreover, the first commentary in the Daozang to the 
work each of the three philosophers is preceded by the same biography, but without 
the illustration. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Taishang laojun yuandao zhenjing zhujie 

16 fols. 

By Yin Zhi St ^ , zi Neixiu (?3 , hao Heming zi ej (fl. thirteenth century) 

761 (fasc. 533) 

“Commentary on Taishang Laojun’s Veritable Scripture of the Original Tao.” For 
the scripture, see 1423 Taiqing yuandao zhenjing. The commentator, Yin Zhi, was a 
contemporary of Bo Yuchan (see 1220 Daofa huiyuan 84.i7b-2ia). The commentary 
mainly quotes the Laozi, the Zhonghuang zhenjing, and the Huangting jing, often 
giving a paraphrase in the place of the original text (see, e.g., the quotation of the 
Zhonghuang zhenjing on 14a). The entire passage of the commentary on I4b-i5a forms 
part of the main text in 1423 Taiqing yuandao zhenjing. The hymn (zan ff ) at the end 
of the text is missing in the other version. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Dadao lun 

24 fols. 

By Zhou Gupu JS| [S] fH ; Song (960-1279) 

1037 (fasc. 704) 

“Discourse on the Great Tao.” This work is a short, well-written philosophical trea- 
tise of the Chongxuan school, whose author is not known elsewhere. The work 

is, however, listed under his name in the Suichu tang shumu by You Mao (1124-1193; 
see VDL 78). The text quotes many different sources, one of which is 72s Daode zhen- 
jing guangsheng yi by Du Guangting (see the present text i2ai, corresponding to 
72s Guangsheng yi z.zb 6 ). It also observes the Song taboo of the character kuang pE 
(see 2ob8). 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 739 ] 

The treatise is divided into eighteen chapters ( zhang $) devoted to traditional 
subjects, such as obtaining or losing the Tao, the quality of the master, and so on. 
Some of the chapters are annotated. The tone is philosophical throughout, with an 
emphasis on the logical explanation of Laozi’s and Zhuangzi’s thought. One of the 
important distinctions the author makes is that between true learning (zhenxue 1 %^) 
and vulgar learning (suxue #y#l). 

The early Tang Taoist scholar Yin Wencao (d. 688) is credited with writing a 
book with the same title (see 956 Zhongnan shan shuojing tai lidai zhenxian beiji 17a), 
but whether the two works are related is unclear. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Sakauchi Shigeo, “ Taidd ron ko.” 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 

Hongdao lu 

56 juan 

By Shao Jingbang (1491-1565) 

1464 (fasc. 1067-1080) 

“Record of the Boundless Way.” This book, despite the word dao jl in its title, has 
nothing to do with Taoism. It is concerned with the Great Way of Confucianism, in 
particular with Neo-Confucian ethics. As the author declares, “Since the school of 
Confucius, men of learning became acquainted with the ways of wisdom and have 
sought to abide by them” (56.5b). Shao is better known for his similarly titled Hong- 
jian lu ‘ihffliB and Hongyi lu jLUM- The Harvard Yanjing Library preserves a rare 
edition of the Hongdao lu, which otherwise seems to be extant only in the Daozang. 

Inspired by the Daxue yan yi (dated 1229) of Zhen Dexiu 

(10.16b), the author composed his book in five principal parts corresponding to the 
Five Virtues of Confucianism. Each principal part is again subdivided into five parts 
corresponding to the five social relationships. The subdivisions provide examples of 
model behavior and speeches by individuals from antiquity up to the author’s period. 
Shao’s personal remarks follow. The book must have been compiled after 1522, during 
the reign of the Ming emperor Shizong, whom Shao refers to as the “present Em- 
peror”— a model of filial piety for his conduct at the time of Wuzong’s funeral in 1522 
(6.21b). 

The text’s regular structure shows up numerous incoherences and lacunae. The 
work was revised and edited by Zhang Guoxiang the compiler of the supple- 

ment to the Daozang at the imperial behest in 1607 (25.22b). 



Kwong Hing Boon 




[740 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 741 ] 



Taixu xinyuan pian IjM 'll' $3 II 

8 fols. 

1047 (fasc. 725) 

“Essay on the Depths of the Mind [in the State of the] Great Void.” This is a short 
text with a section of interpretative lyrics attached to it. Most of the sentences of the 
actual essay are interpreted in poems of twenty words each. 

The poems speak of the enlightenment that characterizes the original state of be- 
ing ( zhenxing Jtft). They also discuss the encroachments of the outside world that 
diminish the original potential. Finally, they deal with the possibility of returning to 
the original state of existence. This work aims to instruct those who would be will- 
ing to “cultivate their existence” (7b). The poems have neither tides nor attributions, 
making it difficult to identify the work precisely. 

Floritm C. Reiter 

Taishang ganying pian ^ _h 01 H 

30 juan 

By Li Changling $ 111 $ (937-1008) 

1167 (fasc. 834-839) 

“Treatise on Retribution of the Most High.” This most famous of the “morality 
books” (shanshu H fj ) is listed in the Bishu sheng xubiandao siku queshu mu (VDL 
89), which implies that it existed already during the Northern Song (960-1127). The 
Song shi , “Yiwen zhi,” gives Li Changling as the author. Zhao Xibian ^ , m his 

appendix to the Junzhai dushu zhi (dated 1249), lists an edition in eight juan. He adds 
that Li, the author, was a hermit of the “Han and Jiaxia jiang kE ” region. This 

designation appears to be an error for “Han and Jialing jiang jj£, H IH'/I,” since the 
Jialing River is a tributary of the Han in Shaanxi and Sichuan. Zhao indicates, more- 
over, that his own father wrote a preface to the work, extolling its Conffician virtues. 
Since the book had eight juan and the text of the Taishang ganying pian itself is short, 
this edition must have also comprised a commentary by Li Changling. 

The Daozang edition gives Li Changling as the author of the narrative commentary 
( zhuan fH). This attribution must be an error, since the commentary contains numer- 
ous dates from the Southern Song period, the latest being 1172 (1.5b). The commentary 
is, moreover, distinctly Taoist, whereas the main text is fundamentally Confucian (see 
below). The narrative commentary is followed by eulogies written by the scholar-of- 
ficial Zheng Qingzhi /^, zi Anwan (1176-1251). 

The present version begins with a presentation memorial to the throne (dated 
1233, i.e., addressed to Emperor Lizong Hth). It is signed by Hu Yingwei 
whose titl cyoujiejianyi zhuguanjiaomen gongshi Taiyi gongfenxiu flj IS; III i ff f’'] 
indicates that he was a Taoist official in the capital and the head of 



an imperial Taoist shrine, the Taiyi gong . The edition to which Hu refers in 

his presentation comprised eight juan, like the edition seen by Zhao Xibian. Hu had 
found it in the Taoist canon. 

It follows from the information in the abundant prefatory matter in the present 
edition (no less than ten prefaces and an undated Chronicle of Miracles [Jishu lingyan 
IE 3$ M !& ] that after the presentation of the book by Hu Yingwei, the Taiyi gong pro- 
duced a printed edition that enjoyed a wide circulation. The edition was enhanced by 
the calligraphy of Emperor Lizong, who wrote die last two lines of the text: “Do not 
commit evil deeds, but devote yourself to doing good ffS§i!fP, It also 

included the eulogies by Zheng Qingzhi ftft [if i preserved here and a colophon by the 
Confucian scholar Zhen Dexiu Rtf , hao Xishan xiansheng l (1178-1235). 
The colophon has also been preserved here and is dated 1235. 

Other local editions must have been made at the same time and during subsequent 
years. To print and distribute the Taishang ganying pian was a work of great religious 
merit. Many scholars followed suit and published editions with their own prefaces, 
some of which are assembled here: those are by Chen Huangzi (dated 1233), 

Gong Youcai (dated 1235), Zheng Dahui Xian Ting (dated 

1238), Ye Yingfu HFlfffj (dated 1235), and Ying Chen IM M (dated 1238). Most of these 
prefaces mention that Li Changling wrote the text as well as a commentary, said by 
Gong Youcai to have amounted to 100,000 characters. Gong severely criticizes Li, say- 
ing that his long-winded glosses served only to complicate a perfectly straightforward 
text. This remark is important, as it shows that Li’s commentary was of a philosophical 
nature, and not a narrative commentary as we have here. 

Of far later date is the preface by Feng Mengzhou if§# IH , here printed immediately 
after the presentation. Feng was a Yuan official in South China. He was asked to write 
this preface by a man from Jiangsu named Wen Huairen who undertook the 

reprinting of the Taiyi gong edition in 1347, completing it two years later. In Wen’s 
own undated preface, which follows Feng’s, he confirms that the version of the Taishan 
ganying pian in his possession originally derived from the Daozang and was printed 
at the Taiyi gong in Hangzhou; he identifies the priest responsible for die printing as 
Zongji m • Neither Feng nor Wen specify the number of juan in their edition. 

What remains, then, is the problem of the narrative commentary. The undated 
Chronicle of Miracles that follows the above-mentioned prefaces is very close in style 
and in intent to the zhuan that follows the main text. That this work cannot be the 
famous commentary by Li Cangling is certain, but there is no indication who wrote 
it, nor where it came from. 

The main text of the Taishang ganying pian comprises only some 1,200 characters. 
It frequently refers to popular worship and repeatedly commends the cult of the Stove 
God (Siming Zaojun n] ph iff ; e.g., 28.2b). In Song times the worship of the Stove 




[ 742 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3.A.1 Philosophy [ 743 ] 



God docs not seem to have been recognized as a Taoist practice. The text states that 
one should not kill animals for sacrifices unless prescribed by ritual (feili xiangzai fp 
M $ 3 ?; i7-7a). Medieval Taoism strongly condemned animal sacrifice and sacrificial 
banquets. The narrative commentary changes the meaning of the text to “do not kill 
animals without reason” (feili xiangzai ; i7-9b2) and thus avoids the issue of 

the ritual sacrifice of animals. This alteration and many others point toward discrep- 
ancies between the main text and the narrative commentary. Whereas the former is a 
mixture of Confucianism and Taoism, the latter is purely Taoist. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Bell, “Printing and religion”; Bell, “A precious raft”; Wang Liqi, u Tatsbang ganying pian 
jieti.” 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Tianyuan fawei f 

18 juan 

By Bao Yunlong IfeSf f|, zi Jingxiang (1226-1296); edited by Fang Hui 77 

tU , zi Wanli H H. (1227-1307) 

1182 (fasc. 855-859) 

“Uncovering the Finer Points of the Fundamentals of Nature.” This work is a philo- 
sophical study in cosmology. The author, Bao Yunlong, became a presented scholar 
(Jinshi Mi) in 1258 on the recommendation of the scholars in his region (xianggong 
jinshi I® MM i). When the Mongols conquered the south, he retired from office. 
The present book is the only extant work attributed to him. It must, however, have 
been quite influential, as many scholars of later preriods reedited and republished it. 
The present edition has neither prefaces nor colophons, although Bao himself pro- 
duced several of these (see Tongjiang xuji, by Fang Hui, 34.1a and 6a). Fang Hui was 
a contemporary of Bao who obtained his jinshi degree in 1262. He is identified here 
as the editor of Bao’s work. According to the authors of the Siku quanshu zongmu 
tiyao 108.5a, all the prefaces and colophons were included in the Yuan edition of the 
Yuanzhen period (1295-1297), which must have served as the model for the Daozang 
version; they were also included in the early Ming edition by Bao Ning a de- 

scended of Bao Yunlong. 

The work is of an encyclopedic nature. A number of key concepts— such as Taiji 
i®, (the whole first juan), dongjing ifriff , jingdong MW], and bianfang — are 

elucidated by quotations from numerous authors, mostly Confucians and Neo- 
Confucians. The most frequently quoted authority is Shao Yong. The fact that the 
latter’s work is also transmitted by the Daozang may have prompted the inclusion of 
the present text. 

Kristofer Scbipper and Tuan Bingling 



Sanyao dadao pian H H Hi M IS 

2 fols. 

Yuan (1279-1368)? 

1260 (fasc. 999) 

“Tract on the Realization of Tao by Means of the Three Essentials.” This work ad- 
dresses practitioners of self-cultivation. The contents suggest that the work was inspired 
by the body of Quanzhen ^ yl literature that emerged during the Yuan period. 

Whoever attempted to practice self-cultivation should renounce all profane ways. 
The practical points of reference are the Three Essentials ( sanyao HU). This term is 
quoted from the Tinfu jing . The unknown author explicidy mentions this 

text. Compare 10S Huangdi yinju jing jizhu 4a, which identifies sanyao with “the ears, 
eyes, and mouth.” This interpretation is also applied in the present work. Concerning 
self-cultivation, it was considered important to control these Three Essentials in order 
to seal the interior spheres of the body against influences of the profane world. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Liugenguidao pian T'slitlf itnffl 

3 fols. 

Yuan (1279-1368)? 

1261 (fasc. 999) 

“Tract on the Return to the Tao by Means of the Six Causes.” This text deals with 
the necessary conditions to effect the return mentioned in the title. The author is 
unknown. The Six Causes are, in Buddhist terminology, the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, 
body, and mind. In this text, the term liugen f\ IS is also used in this way. The present 
text recommends that first the mind should be firmly controlled, then the body. This 
recommendation reflects the realities of the two spheres: inside and outside. If the Six 
Causes are in the condition of tranquillity and purity, then the Great Tao is present. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Tang taigu miaoying Sun zhenren fushou lun || i US M 31 A Id H III 

4 fols. 

Attributed to Sun Simo MM, M (A- 673 ) 

1426 (fasc. 1055) 

“Discourse on Felicity and Longevity, by the Tang Zhenren Sun, Marvelous Re- 
sponse of High Antiquity.” This is a famous little treatise on morality and divine retri- 
bution, fisted in Song catalogues under the title “Discourse on Felicity and Longevity 
of the Nine Realms of Darkness” (Jiuyou fushou lun A IS iff Ira ; see VDL121). The 
present title can be explained by the fact that in 1103 Sun Simo was canonized by 
Song Huizong as Miaoying zhenren %}) jf| A ■ 



[ 744 ] 3.A.1 Philosophy 



3. A. 1 Philosophy [ 74S ] 



This text was engraved on stone by a certain Yang Cong (cf. Jinshi cuibian 
47-24a-27b). 

Catherine Despeux 

Daoshu yuanshen qi iM. itf W 

7 fols. 

Compiled 1305 

1231 (fasc. 988) 

“Key to the Sacred Foundation of Taoist Scriptures.” This is a short treatise that 
attempts to prove the classical and orthodox background of Taoist ritual. The title 
may well be an adaption of that of the famous weishu $$ U commentary, the Xiaojing 
yuanshen qi K? . This adaption, in turn, might indicate that the author was a 

man of some learning. 

In his dated but unsigned preface, the author stresses the common origin of Confu- 
cian and Taoist rites and notes that Confucious took Laozi as master in this respect. 
Later, the followers of Confucius adapted their clothing to the fashions of the age, 
whereas the Taoists did not change theirs, but continued to wear antique robes. Their 
present practice is the direct continuation of the rites of ancient China. The author 
gives thirty-four convincing examples, ranging from the form and setting of the altar 
to ritual instruments and rites such as praying for rain. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao tianzun shuo datong jing 

I fol. 

Song (960-1279) 

327 (fasc. 167) 

“Scripture of the Sermon of Lingbao Tianzun on the Great Communication.” The 
three short paragraphs and the verse that compose this scripture describe the “great 
communication.” “True emptiness” is “inconceivable and indescribable” because it has 
no form. Human beings are the locus of an alternation between rest (their nature) 
and activity (their heart), and they must learn to harmonize these two aspects of their 
existence. The Great Way has no image, nor is there any activity in one’s true nature. 
Those who attain to that rest in which there is no activity will illumine the world with 
their wisdom. The vocabulary is cognate with Song philosophical concepts, especially 
those of the Confucian School of Principle ( lixue If?p). 

John Lagerwey 



Taishang iongxuan baoyuan shangjing 

21 fols. 

368 (fasc. 180) 

“Superior Scripture ofTreasuring the Origin, of the Dongxuan Canon.” A commen- 
tary on the tide announces the variant titles Tuanyi miaojue M — and Ziran thing 
§#$$$. This is a doctrinal treatise based on the Dcwdejing and unknown elsewhere. 
It deals with Heaven, Earth, and humanity, before giving an esoteric interpretation of 
the liturgical title of Taishang laojun: Wuji dadao zhizhen taishang laojun gaohuang 
tianzun yudi bixia The author divides 

this title into ten segments, as so many interior names ( neihao 1^1 §& ) of the god. The 
date of this work is uncertain. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang laojun shuo liaoxin jing iC Jl 4 * © I£ T 'L> M. 

1 fol. 

642 (fasc. 342) 

“Scripture on Total Comprehension of the Mind, Enunciated by Taishang Laojun.” 
The scripture is quoted in a collection of commentaries to the Laojun qingjingjing 
ft fit jfp published during the Yuan (1279-1368) dynasty (737 Taishang laojun shuo 
chang qingjing jing zhu 17a). It mainly emphasizes the importance of ataraxy in the 
practice of meditation, an idea commonly encountered in texts such as the “Guankong 
pian M'jEWi” or the “Taixi pian ffpli.il” (see 1017 Daoshu 10.10a aid 14.8b). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Shuijing lu tjiMM 

16 fols. 

Ming dynasty (1368-1644)? 

1479 (fasc. 1107) 

“Water Mirror Record.” This is a small collection of moral tracts of the morality 
book ( shanshu H U ) genre. It is undated and unsigned and unknown outside of the 
canon. The work begins with the text of 1167 Taishang ganying pian. Next follow two 
texts of the Zitong dijunjie shizi wen f 1 ^ ft it5c it ? ^ . The Tinde yanshou lun $§£ fUS 

comes from 8 si Sanyuan yanshu canzanshu by Li Pengfei hao Jiuhua 

chengxin laoren fiWM'C^: A, published in 1291. The final three short texts are for 
the preservation of animal lives: the Fangsheng wen ~$T for die liberation of ani- 
mals, the Shasheng qijie against the killing of animals, and finally the Quan 

shaniu ge which opposes the slaughter of oxen and eating of beef. 

Kristofer Schipper 



[ 746 ] 3.A.2 Divination and Numerology 



3. A. 2 Divination and Numerology 

Zhouyi tu MI H (HI 

3 juaii 

Southern Song (1127-1279)? 

157 (fasc. 69) 

“Diagrams of the Book of Changes.” The author is unknown, but the present work 
was in any case written after 1180, the year the Rongzhai suibi by Hong Mai (1123-1203) 
was published. Our text explicitly cites the Rongzhai suibi (i.28b-3ob) in a passage 
concerning the Zhouyi juzheng /SJ J| |8 IE (a book from the Tang dynasty). Hong Mai 
states in this passage that he presented the Zhouyi juzheng to the throne, after hav- 
ing discovered its existence in a copy of the Taoist canon preserved in Fuzhou (sig- 
nificandy, these details were deleted from the standard edition of the Rongzhai suibi , 
reproduced in Sibu congkan P) pli if PJ , xuptan ) . Concerning die dating ante quem of 
the present work, the fact that there are no references at all to persons living after the 

second half of the twelfth century suggests that the 
diagrams were compiled some time between the 
end of the twelfth and the beginning of the thir- 
teenth centuries. Liu Shipei brought forward the 
evidence on this question in Du Daozang ji 7b-9a. 
See also the colophon by Chen Hongxu Pit'll# 
(1597-1665) in Jingyi kao 4i.nb-i2b. 

The Zhouyi tu contains a total of 114 diagrams, 
beginning with those related to the Supreme Pole 

Taiji , the Great Ultimate (fig. 6). 
figure 6 . An integral representation ... , , ... ... 

. , _ IT , . , , All the ditterent aspects or the philosophical 

or the Great Ultimate (is? 1.1a) . 

speculations of the Song period (960-1279) con- 
cerning the laws of numbers and the structure of hexagrams are discussed. Almost 
every diagram is explained. More than half of the text is in fact a long excerpt from 
the works of Zheng Shaomei (alias Zheng Dongqing jK J/f[l ; middle of the 

twelfth century; see Zhizhai shulujieti 1.18-19). Zheng is, moreover, either the author 
or the commentator of a great number of the diagrams in juan 1. In Du Daozang ji, 
Liu Shipei published an annotated table of contents of the present work. 

Marc Kalinowski 




3.A.2 Divination and Numerology [ 747 ] 



Dayi xiangshu goushen 

3 juan 

158 (fasc. 70) 

“Charts for Exploring the Deep Meaning of Symbols and Figures of the Book of 
Changes.” This work is a compendium of figures and charts with comments pertaining 
to the symbolism of the hexagrams and arithmetical models of the Book of Changes 
(fig. 7). The present work contains 139 charts and is an expanded version of the section 
on the Tijing (featuring 70 charts) in the Liujing tukcw A H # . The latter was com- 
^ piled by Yang Jia |§ ^ between 1131 and 1162 and revised 
SI 9 by Mao Banghan between 1165 and 1173. The tide 

•J- ±- is already present in the original: see the Ligeng tang M f# 

Jjj ^ Ig" reedition, based on a Southern Song edition. 

The Liujing tu went through a second redaction 
sometime between the end of the twelfth century, when 
nen ^ BBS the former versions were completed, and the middle of 
the thirteenth, when the catalogue that first recorded it 
■■■■ was compiled ( Zhizhai shulu jieti 3.82-83). Its author, Ye 

Zhongkan Mi 1 ^ijS, nearly doubled the number of charts 
concerning the Tijing. Thereafter the Dayi xiangshu goushen 
Ujggj mmmm tu contained 130 charts altogether. It is therefore certain 
that Ye Zhongkan’s version is the same as our present text, 
^ or at l east i ts direct source. 

Needless to say, the attributions to Liu Mu (1011- 
io6 4 ; Daozang mulu xiangzhu 1.23a) or Zhang Li 'Mil (ft. 
1314-1364; Shoujing tu 4.15b) are fictitious. For 

figure 7. A cosmological further details, see Liu Shipei, Du Daozang ji 9b-i2a. 
representation of the Hexa- The 1 39 charts can be classified into three groups: the 70 

gram fu, Regeneration original ones, in the same order as the Ligeng tang edition; 
(iSS 2.25a) , . , - , 1*1 

56 charts forming a homogenous set (2.i2a-b), which we 

know were composed by Zheng Dongqing Jjl J® (157 Zhouyi tu) ; and thirteen charts 

of various origin, mosdy inserted at the beginning of the first juan. 

Marc Kalinowski 



figure 7. A cosmological 
representation of the Hexa- 
gram fu, “Regeneration” 
(is 8 2.25a) 



Tishu gouyin tu M [Ml 

3 juan 

By Liu Mu (1011-1064) 

159 (fasc. 71) 

“Charts for Probing the Hidden Meaning of the Figures of the Book of Changes.” 
This work is an important source on the school of Tijing exegesis (the School of 



[ 74$ ] 3.A.2 Divination and Numerology 



3.A.2 Divination and Numerology [ 749 ] 



Figures). This school flourished during the early Song, under the reign of Song Ren- 
zong (1023-1064). 

Together with his contemporary Shao Yong, Liu Mu is the only member of this 
school whose works have reached us in complete form. The text is mentioned by the 
Junzhai dushu zhi 1.33-34 and has an entry in the Siku quanshu zongmu tiyao 2.ia-b. 
Our edition is also included in the Tongzhi tang jingjie iS M '■ its editor’s preface 

describes the text’s transmission under the Song. We also know that old editions had 
a preface by Ouyang Xiu (1007-1072) that was later deleted because it was 

considered likely to be spurious. 

The present work contains fifty-five charts, which are numbered and usually ac- 
companied by a comment. The last part (3-4a-9b) has no chart. The first two juan 
comprise the charts pertaining to the Tijing itself, while the third refers to the Hetu 
(SJ [MI and the Luoshu (ft H . A short preface by Liu Mu himself introduces the work as 
a whole. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Tishu gouyin tu yilun jiushi K; !$ $>J El [11 It fra V 

14 fols. 

By Liu Mu (1011-1064) 

160 (fasc. 71) 

“Nine Supplementary Items to the Charts to Probe the Hidden Meaning of the 
Figures of the Book of Changes.” This text is a supplement to i$9 Tishu gouyin tu. It 
was published posthumously (yi jJi), after Liu Mu’s death. It was already included 
as an appendix in Southern Song editions (Junzhai dushu zhi 1.134). The reason the 
“Nine Supplementary Items” were not included in the main text from the beginning 
are not clear. They date from the same period. 

Marc Kalinowski 



The second preface (2b-5a), dated 1364 and signed by Zhang Li himself reinforces 
this hypothesis. It was clearly composed for the achievement of the second part of the 
Tixiang tushuo , namely, the outer volume. This preface was indeed written seven years 
after the first preface. Moreover, although it does not name the work thus prefaced, 
its contents essentially introduce the topics of the outer volume. The Tixiang tushuo 
has an entry in the Siku quanshu zongmu tiyao io8.23a-24a. 

In the present work, Zhang Li first exposes Chen Tuan’s theory on the Hetu M 
HI and comments on some passages of the Book of Changes (juan 1). He then pro- 
ceeds to an explanation of the origins of the sixty-four hexagrams (2.1a, 3.7a) with ten 
charts. Last come divinatory calculations using milfoil. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Tixiang tushuo waipian ^ % HI t$£ H 
3 juan 

By Zhang Li jjgfl (fl. 1314-1364) 

162 (fasc. 72) 

“Outer Volume of the Discourse on Symbols 
and Charts of the Book of Changes.” This text is 
the second part of 161 Tixiang tushuo neipian. The 
first juan contains six charts illustrating the numeri- 
cal symbolism of the Book of Changes. The second 
juan is concerned with the internal structure of the 
hexagrams (eight charts; see fig. 8), and the third 
juan discusses their astrological and calendrical 
background as well as their geopolitical interpre- 
tation. 

Marc Kalinowski 







figure 8. Man positioned 
between Heaven and Earth 
(162 2 . 1 a) 



Tixiang tushuo neipian Kr Mi [SI WL ft liS 

3 juan 

By Zhang Li $jkM. (fl. 1314-1364) 

161 (fasc. 71-72) 

“Inner Volume of the Discourse on Symbols and Charts of the Book of Changes.” 
This text forms a set with the “outer volume,” 162 Tixiang tushuo waipian. 

The first preface (ia-2b) was written by Huang Zhencheng HfS/ 5 c in 1357. From its 
content and the way it quotes the title (“Discourse on Symbols and Charts of the Book 
of Changes in One Volume” [Tixiang tushuo yipian MMitSM — M]; prefaces, ib), it 
seems that it refers solely to the neipian. It is therefore likely that this inner volume 
circulated independently already by that time. 



Tishi tongbian 
3 juan 

By Lei Siqi WlfSM (1223-1301) 
ion (fasc. 630) 

“On Penetrating the Transformations Based on the Mantic Procedures of the Book 
of Changes.” This is a treatise on milfoil divination (shi 2 S), that is, the technique of 
drawing a hexagram from the Book of Changes through the manipulation of the mil- 
foil. In the preface written in 1300 for the completion of 1014 Titu tongbian , Lei Siqi 
mentions a treatise on milfoil method ( shifa zK )£ ) that he composed for inclusion 
as an appendix to the former work ( 1012 Kongshan xiansheng Titu tongbian xu 4a). It 
seems almost certain that he refers to the present work. Moreover, allusions to the 




[ 7 /o ] 3.A.2 Divination and Numerology 



3.A.2 Divination and Numerology [ 7 /r ] 



Titu tongbian in prefaces written for the introduction of Lei’s work to the court in 
1331 combine both titles as Ti tushi tongbian ( 1012 Kongshan xiansheng Titu tongbian xu 
ib, 2b). Of the several works by Lei Siqi that were presented on that occasion, only 
the Titu tongbian and the Tishi tongbian are still extant. Their entries in Siku quanshu 
zongmu tiyao (3.563-573) are gathered under a single heading. The origin and dating 
of the present work are thus identical to those of the Titu tongbian. 

The present work’s three juan are divided into five chapters. The first two chapters 
deal with archaic conceptions of milfoil divination, with examples drawn mostly from 
the Zuozbuan £ 1 $. The last three chapters focus on the analysis of the hexagrams’ 
inner structure, on transformations, and on numerical rules pertaining to the actual 
use of the milfoil. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Kongshan xiansheng Titu tongbian 

5 fols. 

By Lei Siqi ft®??; 1300 

1012 (fasc. 630) 

“Prefaces [to the Treatise] on Penetrating the Transformations Based on the Charts 
of the Book of Changes.” The treatise was completed in 1300 by the Kongshan master 
Lei Siqi (1223-1301). It forms a set with its introductory charts (1013 Hetu) and the text 
itself (1014 Titu tongbian). 

The first preface (ia), dated 1286, is by the Thirty-sixth Heavenly Master Zhang 
Zongyan 'Jilzni'fa, who promoted Lei Siqi during the early Yuan period (1279-1368; 
2b). It is not concerned with the Titu tongbian but with the Laozi benyi a 

work also mentioned by the other prefaces. The fact that it is not connected with the 
Titu tongbian might explain why it is fourteen years earlier than Lei’s own preface. 

The second preface (ib-2a), dated the third month of 1332, was composed by the 
eminent Hanlin academician Jie Xisi (1274-1344) for the presentation of Lei’s 

works (including the Titu tongbian) to the court in 1331. The two disciples of Lei who 
came to the capital for presenting their master’s works also obtained a preface from 
the Taoist patriarch Wu Quanjie (1269-1346). Wu’s text, the third in the present 
work (2a-3b), dated the sixth month of 1332, is similar to Jie’s preface, adding only 
some extra details on Lei’s Taoist activities. Wu Quanjie thereby honored his former 
teacher. 

Lei Siqi’s own preface (3b-4a), fourth and last, deals mainly with the Titu tongbian 
and his three -juan extension (1011 Tishi tongbian). The date of Lei’s preface, 1330, can 
be considered as the time when these two works were finally put together. 

Marc Kalinowski 



Hetu M [M| 

2 fols. 

1013 (fasc. 630) 

“River Chart.” This work should be understood 
in the sense that it definitively acquired under the 
Song, that is, as a graphical representation of the 
first nine numbers. 

The present small work is actually an introduc- 
tion to 1014 Titu tongbian ; for its origin and dating, 
see 1012 Kongshan xiansheng Titu tongbian xu. 

The four diagrams in the present work were 
composed by Lei Siqi (i223-i3oi;seefig. 9)- 

His aim was to introduce in an abridged form his 
theory of the genesis of symbols and figures of the 
Book of Changes. He was thus conforming to the use current from the Song onward. 
The diagrams are systematically analyzed in the first two juan of the Titu tongbian. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Titu tongbian Bl 11 H 

5 juan 

By Lei Siqi ffjg??; completed in 1330 

1014 (fasc. 630) 

“On Penetrating the Transformations Based on the Charts of the Book of Changes.” 
The charts mentioned by the tide are actually gathered in the introductory matter to 
the present work, 1013 Hetu. 

Lei Siqi’s preface (in 1012 Kongshan xiansheng Titu tongbian xu) shows that compila- 
tion of the Titu tongbian was finally completed in 1300. It appears from the informa- 
tion provided by the other prefaces that an edition of this work was presented to the 
court in 1331. This edition was probably the basis for the present Daozang edition. 
Another independent edition circulated in the seventeenth or eighteenth century ( Siku 
quanshu zongmu tiyao 3.563-573). 

The first two juan provide a detailed analysis of the charts edited in 1013 Hetu, as well 
as some explanations. Juan 3 discusses the cosmological conceptions and numerical 
rules of the Book of Changes. In the last juan. Lei Siqi traces the history of the charts 
provided at the beginning of his work. He focuses on the traditions that appeared 
under the Song and that distorted the form and original meaning of the Hetu. The 
theories of Chen Tuan, Liu Mu (1011-1064), and Li Gou (1009-1059) 
are discussed in detail. 



v*r 




figure 9. The River Chart, a 
drawing by Lei Siqi (m 3 ia) 



Marc Kalinowski 





3. A.2 Divination and Numerology [753 } 



[ 7S2 ] 3. A. 2 Divination and Numerology 

Huang ji jingshi 

12 juan 

BySHAO Yong S| 3 ^H (1011-1077) 

1040 (fasc. 705-718) 

“The August Ultimate through the Ages.” This is a major treatise of symbolic 
chronology. It is based on the complex intermingling of the decimal and duodecimal 
indexes of the sexagesimal cycle. In its computation, one era ( yuan ft) is the equiva- 
lent of twelve conjunctions ( hui #), 369 revolutions (yun H), and 4,320 generations 
(shi t&). One generation corresponds to 30 years; one era thus comprises 129,600 
years. 

The computations discussed in the present work are said to have been transmitted 
from master to disciple, from their putative author, Chen Tuan, down to Shao 
Yong, who finally compiled them. It is generally considered that the last juan, which 
our edition attributes to Shao Yong himself, was actually written by his son, Shao 
Bowen nlifS (rm (1057-1134), or one of his disciples. 

Several editions have been preserved, among which those by Zhang Xingcheng 
‘jfkfftfi, (twelfth century; Tongle dadian edition, reproduced in Siku quanshu zhenben 
1, entry in Siku quanshu zongmu io8.nb-i2b) and Wang Zhi £ 1 ® 
(seventeenth or eighteenth century; Siku quanshu zhenben 4, entry in Siku quanshu 
zongmu io8.i6a-i7b) are most representative. All of these editions were reorganized 
and supplemented by further writings and comments, making it difficult to identify 
Shao Yong’s original work. Our Daozang edition is no earlier than the Ming, since 
the last date mentioned in the chronologies is the founding of that dynasty in 1368 
(4.38a). This edition comprises twelve juan, each divided into three parts for the first 
ten juan, and two parts for the last two juan. The text is, moreover, divided into num- 
bered chapters ( pian Wi, also called guanwu “investigating phenomena”); their 

contents can be grouped into four parts: (1) the chronological tables themselves (juan 
1-6, chapters 1-34); (2) tables on consonants (shengWt) and vowels (yin gf ; chapters 
38-40), as well as their equivalents in the previous tables (juan 7-10, chapters 35-50, see 
nb.na-i2b); (3) general considerations and explanations on the overall system of the 
Huangjijinshi (juan 11, chapters 41-52, which must be a numbering mistake for 51-62); 
and (4) two unnumbered chapters titled “outer chapters on investigating phenomena” 
(guanwu waipian ). These chapters contrast with die first sixty- two chapters, 

which are usually called “inner chapters on investigating phenomena” (guanwu neipian 
1*3 H )■ The first of these two “outer chapters” (juan 12A) applies the chronologi- 
cal principles to the formal structure of the Book of Changes; the second (juan 12B) is 
a miscellany of philosophical and historical musings of Neo-Confucian inspiration. 

Among the extant editions, the Daozang is the closest to the original disposition as 
described in the Zhizhai shulujieti 1. 16-17 and in more detail in later sources (see, for 



instance, the Wang Zhi edition, liyan Ma ia). Other noteworthy characteristics of 
the present edition include the complete absence of any commentary, the considerable 
amount of historical material inserted in the chronologies, the lack of any reference 
to the hexagrams of the Book of Changes in the first ten juan, and the lacunal and 
confused presentation of the last juan (especially 12B). 

Marc Kalinowski 









figure 10. Cloud formations and haloes for meteorological forecasts (127s ib-42, 4b-5a, and 5b- 
6a). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliothcquc nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1257) 



Tuyang qihou qinji Ml lH§ M $1 

16 fols. 

1275 (fasc. 1004) 

“On Atmospheric Agents [Causing] Sunshine and Rain.” This is a meteorological 
treatise dealing mainly with precipitations. Most of its previsions are based on empiri- 
cal observations: celestial movements, form and color of the clouds, force and direc- 
tion of the winds, among others. It also occasionally uses calendrical computation 
(8b-9a). Some religious elements are concentrated in a long poem in seven-character 
verse (na-i6a). There is no reference to the military and administrative domains. 

The date of the present text is uncertain. It differs from 1276 Pantian jing in its 
less scholarly style and its emphasis on prognostication as opposed to analysis. The 
presence of religious elements and concrete allusions to weather-inflicted calamities 
(destroyed temples, killed cattle, uprooted trees, human casualties) identify it as a 
specimen of the popular manuals used by specialists of meteorological prediction and 
of conjuration of evil influences caused by climatic changes. 

Marc Kalinowski 





[7S4] 3. A.2 Divination and Numerology 

Pantian jing E jg 

15 fols. 

1276 (fasc. 1004) 

Book of Celestial Movements.” This is a short treatise of meteoromancy based 
mainly on the observations of clouds and winds. The analysis of these observations 
also includes calendrical speculations. The work is composed of rather obscure formu- 
las followed by comments that take up the larger part of the text. 

Among the works quoted by the commentary is the Shensbu lingxia jing 
II by Yue Chan ^ M (Chen dynasty, 557-587)- The latter work is referred to as Shenshu 
lingxia in the bibliographic treatises of both Tang histories. The longer title including 
the character jing |f appeared only in the Song (Song shi 206.5246, 5255). Pending 
further evidence, the commentary at least seems to date to the Song (960-1279). 

Marc Kalinmvski 

Lingxin jingzhi M fjf If S' 

8 fols. 

Song (960-1279) 

1425 (fasc.1055) 

Instructions from Canonical Books on Miraculous Signs.” This is a short treatise 
on divination, especially on natural and physical responses to particular situations, 
allowing one to have a foreboding of future events. The book is listed in Song bibli- 
ographies (see VDL 169). 

The unsigned and undated introduction proclaims that this text contains the gist 
of all important works on the subject. The treatise begins with a rhymed part that 
introduces the different kinds of signs. A text in prose follows, called the Liu Gen 
zhenren lingxin jing $$ til j? A M fa ® . Liu Gen is an immortal whose biography was 
originally included in the Shenxian zhuan where he is described as a healer 

(see 1248 Sandong qunxian lu 7.14a). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Rumen chongli zhezhong kanyu wanxiao 

8 juan 

Between 1583 and 1607 

1471 (fasc. 1089-1091) 

“Annals of Perfect Filial Piety for Scholars, on the Critical Use ofTopomancy.” The 
author probably hailed from Fujian, since he alludes to the local traditions of this re- 
gion (8.9b). He introduces himself as a mere compiler of topomantic classics ( “Fanli,” 
ia-b), of which he gives an excellent abstract in the first juan, but above all of the 
related mantic theories, of which he provides an outline in the form of a commentary. 



3.A.2 Divination and Numerology [ 7SS ] 

The work features numerous debates where the conceptions of contemporary physi- 
cians (yijia ff ), calendarists ( lijia ), astronomers ( xingjia MfiC), hemerologists 

( xuanzejia jHf?:iC), and diviners (mingjia upl^) are juxtaposed. The author was also 
a reformer of the almanac (tongshu H U ) and attacked Lii Cai’s B (d. 665, 2.1a, na) 
positions in this regard. 

The present work must have been compiled between 1583 (the latest date mentioned, 
3*4a-b) and 1607, when the Xu Daozang Util jigc was published. The contents can be 
considered to spring from the official reform of the hemerological tables (xuanze lishu 
ill I? US$0 promulgated in 1376, in the early years of the Ming dynasty (2.na-b). 

A detailed table of contents with its own pagination comes before each juan, with 
the exception of the first three juan, whose contents are collected at the beginning of 
juan 1. The whole work is introduced by a foreword ( “Fanli,” ia-2a) in four headings. 
The text itself can be divided into eight parts. The first four parts contain treatises 
on topomancy (juan 1), on theoretical and applied hemerology (juan 2 and 3, respec- 
tively), and various tables and diagrams (juan 4). Next comes the system of the Five 
Cycles and Six Breaths ( wuyun liuqi EiS/EM) according to the Tianfu zhengjing S 

IEM, with the comments of Chen Tuan and the anonymous author of the pres- 
ent work (juan 5). Juan 6 is devoted to the mediod of Hidden Days ( dunjia j|¥), 
according to the theories of a Mr. Xu f^f .EE . Juan 7 discusses astrology on the basis of 
the computation introduced in juan 2 and 4. Last comes an essay on funerary practices 
(juan 8), embellished with many quotations from Neo-Conffician masters and ending 
with the funerary inscription composed by Zhu Xi (1130-1200) for the moving 
of his father’s tomb (cf. Zhuzi daquan 94.22b-23b). 

Marc Kalinowski 

Tiyin shangxia jing M S -t T I? 

6 juan 

By Li Zhi $ If (1527-1602) 

1473 (fasc. 1097-1100) 

“Guide to the Book of Changes.” The expression shangxia. jing _h T l§ refers to the 
traditional division of the Book of Changes into two parts: the First Book ( shangjing 
Jill), containing thirty hexagrams, and the Second Book (xiajing E If), containing 
thirty-four hexagrams. 

It is well known that Li Zhi is the author of this work. His preface, however, was 
not included in the Daozang , the only extant edition of the present text. This preface 
has been transmitted separately in Jingyi kao 55.4a. It explains how Li Zhi composed 
the “Guide” in his old age and that the title Jiuzheng Tiyin A IE MS (Guide to the 
Book of Changes Corrected Nine Times), under which the work appears in biblio- 
graphical catalogues (Siku quanshu zongmu tiyao 7.33a-b), was suggested afterward by 




3.A.2 Divination and Numerology [ 737 ] 



[ 7S6 ] 3.A.2 Divination and Numerology 

his friend Ma Jinglun The Daozang edition therefore presents the original 

title as conceived by the author. The text itself must have been composed in the last 
years of the sixteenth century. 

The Tiyin is shaped as a commentated edition of the Book of Changes. Li Zhi uses 
this form to expound his vast knowledge in the study of this classic. He uses nearly 
eighty commentaries, some of them authored by contemporaries such as Fang Shihua 
77 (late sixteenth century), which is the most often quoted one, and Wang Ji (£ 
H (1497-1582), who was his master. Earlier authors, notably from the Song and Yuan, 
are also quoted extensively. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Guyi kaoyuan A Vj # IJjC 

3 juan 

Early sixteenth century 

1474 (fasc. 1100) 

“Research on the Origins of the Ancient Forms of the Book of Changes.” This work 
was authored by Mei Zhuo $S5jj (see Ming shi 96.2346). Mei appeared on the public 
scene between 1506 and 1521. The present work must therefore date from the early 
sixteenth century. It has an entry in Siku quanshu zongmu tiyao 7.20a— b. 

The Guyi kaoyuan is part of the school of exegesis of the Book of Changes that de- 
veloped from the Song onward. Its author develops personal views on die structure 
and ordering of the sixty-four hexagrams (juan 1) and their origins in the Supreme 
Ultimate (juan 2). He finally raises the question of the primeval forms of the Book of 
Changes (juan 3). 

Marc Kalinowski 

Taichu yuanqijieyao baoshen g zhi 

6 fols. 

1477 (fasc. 1107) 

“Treatise on the Simple [Reading ft for jg] Essentials of Protecting Life through 
the Original Energy of the Very First Beginning.” This treatise presents a method 
of breathing exercises modeled on the annual cycle, with indications of the practice 
required at each season and each month. It uses the metaphors of Inner Alchemy, but 
sparingly. On page ib, Wang Ding zhenren y| A, a legendary immortal of the 
Song (960-1279) period (see LZiT 50.6a-b), is quoted. In the lineage of Taoist patri- 
archs established by Li Jianyi |7| (hao Yuqi zi fl- 1264) in his “Hunyuan 

xianpai zhi tu S/c{i 1|3 Ra^|B(” (see 24s Yuqi zi danjing zhiyao ), Wang Ding occupies 
the same rank as Lu Dongbin, as a direct disciple of Zhongli Quan. 

Kristofer Scbipper 



Xu zhenjun yuxia ji R U 31 (M jjd 

7, 2, 6 fols. 

Preface dated 1433 

1480 (fasc. 1108) 

“Notes from the Jade Coffer of the True Lord Xu.” This short liturgical calendar is 
ascribed to the third-century saint Xu Xun. It features a preface (“Xu”; ia-2b) dated 
1433 and signed by a Mr. Wu (surnamed Gengbi zhai and was probably 

compiled not long before this date. 

The calendar gives the auspicious days for sacrifices according to the localization 
of the deities ( zhushen ID j^). It is integrated within the framework of the revelations 
of the Jade Emperor (6a). 

The table of contents (“Mulu” ia-b) has seventeen entries, including treatises ex- 
tant in the following work, 1481 Fashi xuanzeji. The latter work and the present text 
form a single book (see 1481 Fashi xuanzeji 44a), of which the Yuxia ji is the second 
entry. The first entry is actually merged with the table of contents (“Mulu,” ib-7a) and 
lists the anniversaries of a number of deities belonging to the Taoist, Buddhist, and 
popular pantheons. The Buddhist deities play the major role, as can be seen from their 
number and from the many allusions to the recitation of sutras. 

The author seems to have been inspired by an earlier work, the Xitian yujing jj§ 
(“Mulu,” 4a). The mention of the anniversaries of the Ten Kings of Hell is 
completed by the story of their transmission. This story details how the dates were 
revealed in 1455 by the King of Hell himself to Li Qing $'/jf , a Shandong scholar. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Fashi xuanze ji 

44 fols. 

Postface dated 1488 

1481 (fasc. 1108) 

“Hemerological Notes of the Ritual Master.” This is a short liturgical calendar 
concerning various deities, most of them Buddhist. Its transmission can supposedly 
be traced back to Xuanzang (Sanzang heshang HiScfllfnJ), who composed it in 
627 at the behest of the Tang emperor Xuanzong (ia). The Ritual Master of the title 
probably refers to Xuanzang. The author claims to have used a work from the Bud- 
dhist canon, the Rulai xuanze ji $[]5}vjlf 1^12 (ia). 

The present work is comparable to 1480 Xu zhenjun yuxia ji. It can be considered a 
Buddhist equivalent of the Taoist liturgical doctrine found in 1480 Yuxia ji. This is the 
opinion of the postface’s author (4b-5a). This postface was dated 1488 and attributed 
to a Yanling ££|§|, Xuanxuan daoren A Ajjt A- Both works were then edited in a 
single volume (see 1480 Xu zhenjun yuxia ji). 







[ 7S8 ] 3.A.2 Divination and Numerology 

The Xuanzeji, properly speaking, is the third of the seventeen entries forming the 
table of contents of 1480 Xu zhenjun yuxia ji (“Mulu,” ia— b). The remaining fourteen 
entries are a description of hemerological and astrocalendrical procedures transcribed 
from various sources. Entries 8 to 10 form a comprehensive set reproduced from 1267 
Jiutian shangsheng bichuan jinfu jing ib-nb. Entry 13 (29a) is indicated as copied from 
iBiyujing^JR^. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Ziwei doushu $$ 1 |S[ 

3 juan 

1485 (fasc. 1114) 

“[Treatise] on the Calculus of the Bushel in Purple Sublimity.” The realm of Purple 
Sublimity (Ziwei yuan is a common name for the central part of the Sphere 

of the Fixed (see Jin shi 20.433), on the border of which lies the Northern Bushel 
constellation. The present text is a divination treatise based on the layout of eighteen 
partly imaginary stars on a mantic matrix comprising twelve divisions. These twelve 
divisions fit the twelve branches of the sexagesimal cycle. The layout of the stars on 
the matrix depends mainly on the inner symmetries within the cycle and on symbolic 
connotations of its elements (the ten stems and the twelve branches). This procedure 
is used for the interpretation of individual horoscopes ( bazi A-'Ts 1.1a) also computed 
by means of the sexagesimal calendar. 

The present work was never listed in bibliographical catalogues. The Purple Sub- 
limity method has nonetheless been known for a long time and still plays a large part 
among contemporary calendrical systems. All the modern texts can be traced back to 
the Ziwei doushu quemshu published under the Ming by Luo Hongxian (1504-1564). 
Although both texts share the same computation and overall structure, the present 
work represents a distinct tradition. Its names for the eighteen stars (excluding Ziwei 
% W , which gives its name to the work, and Wenchang II ) and the ordering of the 
mantic values conferred upon the twelve divisions of the sky (the twelve palaces [gong 
IK]; i.2ob-33a) are altogether different from those in modem use. 

The present text exhibits, under various angles, an archaic stage of the method. The 
description of the stars and palaces (2.i4a-3.26a) is suffused with elements borrowed 
from Greek astrology, a dimension absent from Luo Hongxian’s book. Meanwhile, 
there is no reference to the Northern Bushel, despite the allusion to it in the title. A 
more fitting title would therefore be “[Treatise] on the Eighteen Stars of the Purple 
Sublimity (or Cavern).” The text also includes noteworthy archaisms, such as Cavern 
Sublimity (dongwei M' 0 .) instead of Ziwei (2.143.9), and the Four Masters [of Fate] 
(sizhu |ZH ± ) instead of the Four Pillars ( sizhu 0 fi ; 2.na.6). 



3.A.2 Divination and Numerology [ 7S9 ] 

On the other hand, Luo Hongxian’s work shows many characteristics of a later 
edition. The number of stars has increased dramatically and includes the mantic ap- 
pellations of the stars of the Northern Bushel and other imaginary stars also present 
on a geomancer’s compass; their total number exceeds 30. Today it has reached 115, 
covering several categories (ji |$). It may be noted that astronomers had previously 
identified fifteen stars within the realm of the Purple Sublimity (Jin shi 290). The 
method itself also produced new computations that are absent from the present 
work. 

The antiquity of the present work probably made it difficult for practicians to use. 
From the Ming onward, they therefore chose to work with the revised edition by Luo 
Hongxian. Internal criticism thus tends to suggest an early date for the present work: 
Yuan (1279-1368) or, more likely, Song (960-1279). As there are no external criteria 
for dating the work, however, there can be no definitive conclusion on this point. Luo 
Hongxian’s edition, besides frequently citing Chen Tuan, the putative author of the 
Purple Sublimity method, also quotes comments by Bo Yuchan. 

Man Kalinowski 

Lingbao liuding bifa If If A T Wife 

16 fols. 

581 (fasc. 322) 

“Secret Lingbao Method Concerning the Spirits of the Six Ding Days.” The ritual 
devoted to the spirits mentioned in the title is practiced individually. In general, it 
serves a propitiatory function (see, e.g., 8a-b) but may also be performed as a spiritual 
exercise (e.g., ioa-b). 

The present method bases itself on a certain Liuding jue ATIA which also under- 
lies the ritual described in juan 2 of s86 Huangdi taiyi bamen rushijue (q.v.). The latter 
text appears to be regarded as authoritative. It is mentioned twice, each time with both 
a succinct but accurate description of its table of contents in three juan and an account 
of the transmission of the method. In the first account, the transmission takes place 
from the Dark Maiden (Xuannii A A) to the Yellow Emperor (4a); in the second 
account, it is passed to a certain Zhang Qun 55 ]$, through the intermediary of the 
goddess of the dingchou day (dingchou shennii T Sj^ A; 10a). The second account 
is reproduced in a more detailed but less careful version in s88 Huangdi taiyi bamen 
nishun shengsijue (q.v.). The reference to the Liuding jue there is replaced by one to a 
Taiyin xuannii jing A HI: A A • 

The two citations of a Xianjing f[ij in s86 Rushijue are also found in the present 
text. The first citation (2.7b) occurs, on the one hand, in abridged form with a refer- 
ence to the Xianjing (7b); on the other hand, it appears in extenso but is ascribed to 




[ 760 ] 3.A.2 Divination and Numerology 



3.A.2 Divination and Numerology [ 761 ] 



the Yellow Emperor (15b). The second citation is embedded in a larger citation of the 
Yellow Emperor (ib-2a). 

The end of this brief work records a method of corpse liberation ( shijie r'M) by 
means of embryonic breathing (i4a-i5a). 

Aldiough the present work is close to the two above-mentioned treatises in the 
Daozang , it differs from them in the following respects: its style is more refined; the 
ritual is essentially devoted to goddesses of the six ding days; whereas in $86 Rushijue 
several other deities are involved in the transmission and instruction of the text by the 
Jade Maiden (Yunnii 3 £ A ) or the Dark Maiden, in the present text only the Yellow 
Emperor figures in that role; finally, while the mantic system of the Hidden Days 
(. dunjia M ^ ) here underlies parts of the ritual sequence, its role in the two related 
works is more explicit. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Huangdi taiyi batnen rushi jue ff “rif A £ A H A A ife 

3 juan 

586 (fasc. 323) 

“Instructions Transmitted by the Yellow Emperor for Penetrating the Order of the 
Eight Gates of the Great One.” This work is a collection of ritual instructions centered 
on the cult of the spirits of the six ding days ( liuding AT) in the sexagesimal cycle 
(juan 2). The ritual itself is based on the authority of a Liuding shenjue AT Wife 
(2.2a), which is also mentioned and described in s8i Lingbao liuding bifa (q.v.). The 
ritual is preceded (juan 1) by a fragmentary discussion of mantic methods involving 
Hidden Days ( dunjia M ^ )• These methods are characterized by the order of the 
Eight Gates and Nine Palaces, to which the title refers. The beginning of this introduc- 
tory part is in seven-character verse (i.ia-3a). The work ends with a series of closing 
rites: the surveying of constellations and propitiatory invocations of the five sectors 
and six directions (juan 3). 

Apart from the Jade Maiden (Yunii T A ), who is served by the spirits of the ding 
days as acolytes (2.3b), the instructing deities are the Most High Lord Lao and San- 
huang da dandi TM A AT- The divinatory ritual described in i.4a-6b shows traces 
of Buddhist terminology. A Damo taixijing ill 115 3 p is cited in the short passage 

devoted to embryonic respiration (i.3a-4b). 

The present text is one of three related liturgical texts; the other two texts are s $7 
Huangdi taiyi bamen rushi bijue and s 88 Huangdi taiyi bamen nishun shengsijue, which 
follow immediately after the present text in the Daozang. Besides the similarity of their 
titles, these three texts share a number of passages in common, including two citations 
of a Xianjing fill that can also be found in s 8 i Lingbao liuding bifa. 

Marc Kalinowski 



Huangdi taiyi bamen rushi bijue iK A — A PI A & ife 
18 fols. 

587 (fasc. 324) . . _ , 

“Secret Instructions Transmitted by the Yellow Emperor for Penetrating the Order 
of the Eight Gates of the Great One.” As in s 86 Huangdi taiyi bamen rushijue , the 
title here refers to the spatial order of the Eight Gates and Nine Palaces of the mantic 
method of the Hidden Days (dunjia jjgep). The spirits of the six ding days (liuding 
AT) in the sexagesimal cycle, however, play a less important role in the present text 
than in s 86 Rushi jue. Here they are replaced by the six wu ft days, for which the text 
provided talismans, seals, and instructions regarding their use (5h-9a). The ntual is 
constructed around a procedure titled Concealed Return of the Jade Maiden (12a), 
which is also described in 888 Huangdi taiyi bamen nishun shengsijue under the slightly 
different title Hidden Form of the Jade Maiden (2b). The version found in the present 
text seems to have been current at least under the Song. See the Dunjia fuymg jmg 

(written at the imperial behest between 1034-1038). 

The Dunjia faying jing (3.14b) contains a passage that is identical to i 4 b.i -5 m 
the present work and to s 86 Huangdi taiyi bamen rushi jue 3.2b; it also continues 
most of the ritual described in the present text (see Dunjia faying jing 3.9b ff. for 
the Concealed Return of the Jade Maiden, and 3.15b ff. for the spirits of the six ding 
days). Indeed, the Dunjia faying jing, primarily a deductive divination treatise for 
the Hidden Days method, provides the theoretical model for the structure of the 
ritual. The imperial officers responsible for the composition of the Dunjia faying jmg 
devoted fully one third of the text to the method of the Hidden Days. The transmis- 
sion of that method, which first appeared in uSs Baopu zi neipian 17.5b, seems closely 
tied to that of the kind of rites found in the present work. It may be noted that 
Emperor Renzong’s (r. 1023-1064) preface to the Dunjia faying jmg states that the 
undertaking was the result of a discovery of “Secret boob on the [method of the] 
dragon days” (Longjia bijing f| ^ IBIS) in a secluded dwelling on Mount Peng M Ol 
(preface, ia). 

Marc Kalinowski 

Huangdi taiyi bamen nishun shengsi jue M'S? A ^ 

27 fols. 

588 (fasc. 324) 

“Instructions Transmitted by the Yellow Emperor Concerning Progression and 
Regression of Birth and Death through the Eight Gates of the Great One. This text 
constitutes the last of the series of three consecutive worb in the Daozang (see also 

I S 86 Huangdi taiyi bamen rushijue and s87 Huangdi taiyi bamen rushi bijue). The titles, 
form, and content of these worb suggest that they belong to the same liturgical 



I 



[ 762 ] 3. A. 2 Divination and Numerology 



3.A.2 Divination and Numerology [ 763 ] 



context. Unlike the other two, however, the present text is not structured around a 
principal rite. 

The work’s constituent elements can be distinguished as follows. Page ia: a table 
of the six decades of the sexagesimal cycle and their correspondences with the Eight 
Gates and the method of divination by Hidden Days (dunjia MV ',S86 Rushijue opens 
with a similar mantic table). Page 2b-4a: method of the hidden form of the Jade 
Maiden (described in identical terms \ns87Rushi bijue [q.v.]). Page 6b-na: method of 
the Orphan and the Void (gu xu M/jfi), including an account of its transmission by 
the Dark Maiden (Xuannii ^ to Li Jing TJit in 628 (also found, with significant 
variants, in s86 Rushijue i.7a-nb). Page i4b-22a: Book of the Dark Maiden of Great 
Yin ( Taiyin xuannii jing A Hi S A IS), a ritual centered on the cult of the spirits of 
the six ding days of the sexagesimal cycle. Tided “unique method among ten thou- 
sand” (wanyifa H — ; the complete tide is given in s8i Lingbao liuding bifa 9b), its 

transmission to a certain Zhang Qun is due to the goddess of the dingchou day 
(dingchou shennii T 5 W A ; 15a). The whole of this ritual is reproduced almost identi- 
cally in s8i Lingbao liuding bifa 9b-i4a, with the exception of the final section in the 
present work (2oa-22a), for which s8i Lingbai liuding bifa substitutes the description 
of a method of embryonic respiration. Page 22a-25a: a complement to the preceding 
part, providing instructions for the fabrication and use of the six talismans of the Yin 
spirits (the six ding days) of the six decades of the sexagesimal cycle ( liujiayinfu A T 
HfT). These instructions are also partially included in $8i Lingbao liuding bifa I2b-i4a 
and, in a more detailed version, in Dunjia fuyingjing 3.i8a-i9b. 

Finally, we may point out a series of recipes for diverse potions (ia-b and ua-i4b). 
The series on na-b is also found in YJQQ 77.13a, with the same transmission ac- 
count. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Bizang tongxuan bianhua liuyin dongwei dunjia zhenjing 

3 juan 

Song (960-1279) 

857 (fasc. 576) 

“Book of the Six Yin of the Sublime Grotto [ Liuyin dongwei jing], Veritable Scrip- 
ture of the Hidden Days [Dunjia zhenjing].” This tide corresponds to two treatises 
combined. The Six Yin are the spirits of the ding T days of the six decades in the 
sexagesimal cycle, while its jia ^ days are Yang spirits (2.2a). The mantic method of 
the Hidden Days constitutes the formal framework of the cult of the Six Yin (i.na). 
This method does not feature direcdy in the present work, however, except in the 
introduction (see below). 



Two documents are inserted at the end of the first juan. The first document (8a-ioa) 
is in the form of a deed written in 971 by the Song official Zhao Pu 3 § 1 f (921-991), 
on the occasion of the registration of a writ in the Department of Forbidden Books of 
the Imperial Library ( bishuge ILUfJII )• The expression bizang (kept in the impe- 

rial library) in the tide of the present work suggests that it was the object of the deed. 
The work may thus date to the second half of the tenth century. The author indicates 
having obtained it from a recluse named Liu Han T on Luofii shan HT U-I- 

The second document (iob-i2a) is the preface to a Dunjia shenjing jfi ¥ WIS (or 
fujing ) in three juan. The account of its transmission is assimilated with that of 
the Tinfujing (1.11a). 

The contents of the present work are related to the tradition of the secret method 
of the six ding ( liuding bifa ATI'S; 2.3a). Like the other texts produced by that 
tradition, it bases itself on the first chapter of a Liuding jue AT IS in three juan (cf. 
S81 Lingbao liuding bifa 4b, 10a) and is essentially devoted to ritual. 

The first two juan describe the central ritual of the cult of the six ding spirits. The 
second juan repeats in greater detail what is said in the first. The main ritual, or Sacri- 
fice of the Great Assembly ( dahuiji A# Ik), was held six times per year, on thejiazi 

f- days; the secondary ritual, or Sacrifice of the Small Assembly ( xiaohui ji T#^), 
was held thirty-six times per year, on the ding days. Noteworthy is the importance as- 
signed to the northern warrior Zhenwu zhenjun llSRT, Lord of the North (2.2a) 
or of the Center (3.7a). The third juan is, apart from a brief resume (ia-2a) of 2.6a-8a, 
entirely devoted to talismans used in the ritual. 

Man Kalinowski 

Xuanjing bixia lingbao juxuan jing ft fit ?! [M fif T I? 

3 juan 

Song (960-1279) 

984 (fasc. 618) 

“Book of the Mysterious Aggregates of the Marvelous Jewel, from the Jade Casket 
of Mysterious Essence.” This is a manual of divination according to the ancient system 
of Hidden Days ( dunjia 3® V )• The idea of “aggregates” here refers probably to the 
fact that the present work endeavors to combine different forms of computation and 
time calculation, notably those of dunjia and liuren AT, as in the twenty-second 
chapter (3.12b). The style of the work is abstruse in the extreme, and there are many 
missing parts on each page. 

The contents can be compared with those of the most ancient manual of this 
mantic art, the Dunjia fuying jing, which was composed on imperial order in the 
years 1034-1038. The present treatise could represent a sibylline version of the latter. 
In this respect we do have here an important document for the study of the social 




[ 7<*4 ] 3.A.2 Divination and Numerology 



3.A.3 Medicine and Pharmacology [ 76 s ] 



currents that contributed, during the Song dynasty, to the continuation of the mantic 
techniques related to the Hidden Days method. 

Each juan is subdivided into twenty-four rubrics (bu Sfl). The first two juan are 
mosdy dedicated to dunjia , while the third makes extensive use of the liuren and feng- 
jiao HI m techniques. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Tiwai biezhuan U ^ 8 ! J fil 

25 fols. 

By Yu Yan ca. 1284 

1009 (fasc. 629) 

“Extraneous Commentary to the TijingV The tide of the present work can be ex- 
plained by the wish of the author to make this text into an appendix of his Zhouyi jishuo 
Jnl M m (Collection of Interpretations of the Zbouyi; see 1010 Xuanpin zhi men fu). 
He also considers that the present work contains marginal developments with respect 
to the theoretical foundations of the Book of Changes. The expression yiwai biezhuan 
appears to have been introduced by Zhu Xi 7^ M. (1130-1200; see Siku quanshu zongmu 
tiyao 4.15b). The present work is reviewed in Siku quanshu zongmu tiyao i46.54b-56a. 

The preface of Yu Yan (fl. 1253-1296) contains littie concrete information except 
the date of 1284, by which the work was presumably completed. More information 
about the scope and the form of the present work can be found in the two colophons 
appended to 1010 Xuanpin zhi men fu. The work presents itself as a commenatry on 
certain tenets of metaphysical and alchemical thought as expressed in works like the 
Zhouyi cantong qi fa] J/j ’ll S §§ and the Tinjujing IH fff , on both of which Yu Yan 
himself wrote glosses ( 100s Zhouyi cantong qi fahui and 12s Huang di yinfu jing zhu). 

The present commentary is certainly tainted with Taoism, but its overall orientation 
is Confucian, as can be seen from the numerous references to the theories of Shao 
Yong, Zhu Xi (1130-1200), and others. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Xuanpin zhi men H lit 

4 fols. 

By Yu Yan between 1284 and 1296 

1010 (fasc. 629) 

“Rhapsody of the Gate of the Dark Female.” The tide corresponds to that of the 
prose poem (fu) at the beginning of this short text. The allusion to the famous passage 
of the sixth chapter of the Daodejing is understood here as a reference to the alchemi- 
cal process. Moreover, the present opuscule contains a short poem dedicated to Lu 
Dongbin. 



The colophon by Yu Yan (fl.1253-1296) does not refer to the poems presented 
here, but concerns mosdy the preceding 1009 Tiwai biezhuan. The author explains the 
general organization of the work and the sources he used. It appears that Yu intended 
to append the Tiwai biezhuan to his collected interpretations of the Zhouyi ( Zhouyi 
jishuo compiled between 1284-1296; see the preface by Yu Yan to this 

work in the Tongzhi tang jingjie ili&'gfSflP). As the preface of the Tiwai biezhuan is 
dated 1284, it is reasonable to suppose that the pieces contained in the present small 
collection were also written between that date and 1296. 

A second colophon is by Yu Yan’s son and was written on the occasion of his print- 
ing of the Xuanxue zhengzong in 1356. Yu Zhongwen ffr { 4 1 tun states that his 

father integrated the Tiwai biezhuan into the Zhouyijishuo (this is no longer the case in 
the Tongzhi tang jingjie edition) and that the Xuanxue zhengzong originally contained 
three works by Yu Yan: the Tiwai biezhuan; a commentary on the Tinjujing 
(probably 12s Huangdi yingfu jing); and his commentary to thcQinyuan chun (/£.' IS S 
by Lu Dongbin (136 Lu Chunyang zhenren Qinyuan chun danci zhujie). 

The authors of the Siku quanshu zongmu tiyao (i47.3oa-3ob) considered that the 
placement of the colophons to the Tiwai biezhuan at the end of the present collection 
indicated that these two texts were edited as one work in the now lost Xuanxue zheng- 
zong. 

Man Kalinowski 



3. A. 3 Medicine and Pharmacology 

Tujing yanyi bencao IB IS fff S§ $ ^ 

5+42 juan 

Compiled by Kou Zongshi 1116; revised by Xu Hong (fl. 1208) 

768-769 (fasc. 535 - 550 ) 

“Enlarged and Illustrated Materia Medica.” This work is edited in two parts, 
beginning with a head-scroll (shangjuan _h^£) divided into five juan and contain- 
ing prefatory texts, followed by the Materia Medica (bencao ^^) itself, in forty-two 
juan. 

The first part (shangjuan) contains a great number of prefaces to various previous 
bencao that were incorporated into the present handbook: the preface to the Jiayou 
bencao of 1061 by Zhang Yuxi (i.ia-5b); the preface to the Tujing 

ffljfg [bencao of 1062 by Su Song WM. (i.5b-9a); the preface to the Kaibao 

chongding bencao Hflff of 973 (i.9a-ua); the preface to the so-called Tang 




[ 766 ] 3.A.3 Medicine and Pharmacology 



3.A.3 Medicine and Pharmacology [ 767 ] 



ben [bencao] of 659 by Kong Zhiyue (i.iob-i2b); and the preface of 

Tao Hongjing to his Materia Medica, commentated by Zhang Yuxi (i.i3a-26a). 

The second juan of the shangjuan opens with an introduction (xuli ffM) on the 
art of picking and preparing medicinal herbs (2.ia-iob). Zhang Yuxi then turns to the 
history of Chinese bencao and presents prefaces of ancient works that he and others col- 
lected: xhcTaodui §£)?>f ofXu Zhicai ; the Qianjin fang T 1 77 by Sun Simo; 

the Bencao shiyi $ Alp'll by Chen Zangqi ^ i$c §£ ; the Chongguang buzhu shennong 
bencao bing tujing fi lit M If 1$ J§ $ # H IS of 1092 by Lin Xi ; and the Leigong 

paozhi lun 1 $ Mi (shangjuan 2.iob-2ob). Juan 3 of the shangjuan opens with 
the preface to the Bencao yanyi |£ fjf Jg by Kou Zongshi himself (dated 1116). This 

preface is followed by the continuation of the introduction (xuli) that began in the 
previous juan. The last two juan of the shangjuan still continue the introduction and 
deal with the classification of medicinal herbs and animal and mineral substances. 

The above summary illustrates the confused arrangement of the present edition, 
in which some parts— for example, the table of contents— are missing. It is neverthe- 
less possible to reconstitute the successive strata of which the present handbook is 
composed. 

The most fundamental Materia Medica is the Shennong bencao of the late 

Han period. Its title appears for the first time in the Qilu of the Liang dynasty 
(see Ruan shiQilu). This work listed the symbolic number of 365 medicinal ingredients 
(there are in fact more in the extant editions). It was enlarged and annotated by Tao 
Hongjing, and edited as the Shennong bencao jing jizhu, fisting 720 ingredients. Of 
this work only fragments survive (see the edition by Mori Rishii fisted in the general 
bibliography). In the present text, quotations of the work of Tao Hongjing are 
introduced with the words: “Tao the Hermit says (Tao yinjuyue 1 $®® /U S ).” 

In 657, an imperial edict ordered a group of twenty-two scholars under the direc- 
tion of Su Jing Hffc (fl. 656-660)— or, according to other sources, under Kong 
Zhiyue— and Li Ji ^i/j (594-669) to compile a new Materia Medica (cf. Jiu Tang 
shu 79.2726-27). The work was completed in 659, and its study became mandatory 
for physicians under the Tang. The new bencao was based on the book of Tao Hong- 
jing, enlarged by 114 new descriptions of remedies. Called Xinxiu bencao 
or Tangben [bencao], the handbook had fifty-three or fifty-four juan (see shangjuan 
1.12b), of which twenty-five were devoted to pictures and seven to text with illustra- 
tions. Because of an imperial taboo of the Daguan era (1107-1110), Su Jing’s name was 
written Su Gong as is the case here. The Tang official bencao is quoted in our 
handbook under the heading “ Tang ben zhu /If $g£ .” 

Somewhat later appeared the Shu bencao §s) if ^ in twenty juan, a revised edition 
of the official handbook of 659, by Han Baosheng fife# of Sichuan. This book is 
quoted here under the heading “Shu benyun §0 $ zi; •” There are also quotations here 



of a Shu ben tujing H IS , but there is no conclusive evidence that this is the same 

work. 

A slightly later Materia Medica was the Rihua zi zhujia bencao 0 
which reportedly had twenty juan and was compiled by a certain Rihua zi, reputed to 
have lived during the Kaibao era (968-976). Nothing else is known of him. This work 
is often quoted here. 

In 973, a new imperial edict ordered the medical doctors to revise the extant Ma- 
teria Medica, to incorporate the important elements of the Bencao shiyi ^ bin'll 
(completed in 739) of Chen Zangqi and the Bencao yinyi it of Li 

Hanguang, and to add new findings. This work was completed by Liu Han 
the Taoist Ma Zhi and Wang Guangyou JEJjSftj. It is known under the title 
of Kaibao bencao UfjJ J| $ ^ • Again under imperial supervision, this work was revised 
by Li Fang and reedited under the title Kaibao chongding bencao Ufl Sf £ /iE $ ^ . This 
collection contained descriptions of 983 ingredients. The material from the Tangben 
of 659 was marked ‘Tang fu /if [if J ” and the new additions “jin fu ^ pfj .” 

Later, under the Song, a new Materia Medica was compiled at imperial behest and 
under the direction of Zhang Yuxi ^ 0 , $| , Lin Yi Zhang Dong 35 j[ 5 ] , and Su 
Song jff 'M • This work was presented to the throne in 1061 under the title Jiayou buzhu 
Shennong bencao Its main sources were the above-mentioned 

Kaibao chongding bencao and the Shu bencao. The new additions were marked “xin bu 
The quotations of the Tang ben were introduced as “ Tang ben zhu /if $!£” 
and those of the Kaibao bencao as “ jin zhu jj£ .” Entirely new materials added in this 

handbook were marked “ xinding fj^.” There are only seventeen such items. This 
Jiayou bencao fisted no less that 1,082 ingredients. 

A year later, illustrations were added to the Jiayou buzhu Shennong bencao. Hence- 
forth it was thus entitled Bencao tujing $ Ijl H . Another ninety-eight descriptions 
were added on that occasion; these were marked “ benjing wailei $ IS Iff .” As told 

in our present work (shangjuan 1.6a), under the Tang there had been two illustrated 
bencao: that of Su Jing (see above) and the Danfang yaotu H H of the Tianbao 
era (742-756). Both works were lost by the time of Su Song, who could procure only 
the last juan of the Danfang yaotu. 

In 1092, Chen Cheng of Sichuan arranged the Jiayou bencao of 1061 and the Tujing 
of 1062 into one single book. He added a few new elements, marked “bie shuo )JIJ ” 
This work is the Chongguang buzhu Shennong bencao bing tujing 
jj [Ml IS . The title is mentioned in the Ke edition of the Jingshi zhenglei daguan bencao, 
which also includes all the material from the Jiayou bencao and the Tujing. Perhaps this 
is the same work under a different title. 

Finally, in 1116, Kou Zongshi compiled a Bencao yanyi with the aim of correcting the 
errors of the Jiayou bencao and the Tujing. His work was published three years later. 




[ 768 ] 3 .A .3 Medicine and Pharmacology 



3 .A .3 Medicine and Pharmacology [769] 




figure 11. (above and opposite) Two techniques for winning salt from seawater: Salt-making 
by evaporation in a cauldron and in a salt marsh (769 3.7b-9a and 9a-b). Ming reprint of 1598. 
Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/761) 



Until 1195, the title of this new handbook was Bencao guangyi Jjl ; it was then 

changed into yanyi ftf H in avoidance of the personal name of Emperor Ningzong 
(r. 1195-1224). In 1249, the book was edited as a supplement to a new edition of the 
Daguan bencao, called the Chongxiu Zhenghe bencao Jt ff§£ III $ ^ . The arrangement 
of the prefaces and their texts is identical with that of the present work. 

It appears, therefore, that the present Tujing yanyi bencao corresponds to the Chong- 
guang buzhu shennong bencao bing tujing, to which was added the text of the Bencao 
yanyi of Kou Zongshi at the end of each rubric. The contents of the present text are 
identical with the Chongxiu Zhenghe bencao , but the quotations are given here in a 
different order. 

The present work is in many respects similar to the Leibian tujing jizhu yanyi bencao. 
This work appears to be based on a Xinbian leiyao tuzhu bencao 
of which there were several printings during the Song and the Yuan. Some of these 
editions name a certain Liu Xinfu {g frj (early thirteenth century) as having carried 
out the revisions (see Tiji kao of bencao 3, p. 146). 

In a colophon to the Bencao yanyi , of which he had obtained the Yuan printing 
blocks, Zhu Yizun says that this work was included in the Taoist canon by a 

certain Boyun zi (see Pushu tingji Bfl H ^ JH , 55). Boyun zi is most likely Qi 

Zhiyuan ;£*§$, aQuanzhen Taoist and a close friend of Song Defang, who 
directed the edition of the Taoist canon of 1246. The title Bencao yanyi may designate 





figure 12. A furnace 
for making mercury (769 
3.22b). Ming reprint of 
1598. Courtesy of the 
Bibliotheque nationale de 
France. (Chinois 9546/761) 



the original twenty-juan work by Kou Zongzhi or the 
present handbook, which is sometimes quoted under this 
abbreviated title. 

The present Materia Medica gives more than 1,000 
descriptions classified in eight categories: minerals (juan 
1-6), herbs (7-20), shrubs (21-25), ingredients of human 
origin (26), quadrupeds (27-29), birds (30), fish and 
insects (37-39), vegetables and spices (40-42). Each me- 
dicinal ingredient is minutely described: its taste, toxicity, 
place of origin, the best time for its harvest, its therapeutic 
uses, its combination with other remedies, and sometimes 
the mode of preparation. 

More than 120 different works are quoted. The Shen- 
nong bencao jing, however, remains the fundamental text. 
For the mineral ingredients, some alchemical works are 
cited, such as 92s Danfang jianyuan and 930 Sanshiliu shuifa. 
In general, the name of the ingredient is given in white in 
a black frame. For each item there are one or more illustra- 
tions with indication of the place of origin of the variant. 
There is also an illustration of salt fabrication (3-7b-9a; 
see fig. 11) and of a furnace for making mercury (3.22b; 
see fig. 12). 

Catherine Despeux 



[770 ] 3 .A .3 Medicine and Pharmacology 



3 . A . 3 Medicine and Pharmacology f 77 / ] 







FIGURE 13. Fabulous mushrooms of immortality: Red Jade, China Root, Zuo Spirit with female 
guardian, Metal Essence ( 1406 2a, 21b, 30a, 62a). Ming reprint of 1598- Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1387) 



Taishang lingbao zhicao pin A 

64 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

1406 (fasc. 1051) 

Catalog of Mushrooms of Immortality.” This work contains illustrations, with 
short descriptive texts, of 127 mushrooms or herbs of Long Life. Neither the anony- 
mous preface nor the text give any indication of the provenance or date of the work. 

The zhi £ fungus plays an important role in the Shangqing tradition (five kinds 
of z^i-mushrooms were said to grow on the Maoshan ^llj) as well as in the Ling- 
bao corpus. A text with the tide Dongxuan lingbao zhi pin is listed in 

the catalog of the Lingbao canon in so8 Wushang huanglu dazhai licheng yi 1.6b. Well 
before that, the importance of the zhi - plant had been stressed in 388 Taishang lingbao 
wufu xu 15b and passim, and a large part of chapter 11 of the BPZ is also dedicated to 
this plant. Numerous texts concerning zhi are fisted in Song bibliographies, and many 
of these were illustrated (see fig. 13). A Taishang lingbao zhi pin is fisted 

in the Chongwen zongmu (VDL 89). 

With respect to the description of individual zhi , the present work has no direct 
relationship with chapter 11 of the BPZ, nor with 933 Zhong zhicao fa (compare also 
1206 Shangqing mingjian yaojing 8b-i3a, which refers to “illustrations”). Texts contain- 
ing descriptions that can be related to those in the present work are found in Tiwen 
leiju 98 (a description of nineteen zhi, giving Baopu zi as source), in Taiping yulan 986 
(a description of thirty-two zhi, quoting a Xiamen caizhi tu fill A£f *£111 as source; 
compare the quotation of a Caizhi tu I4) jft| in Bencao gangmu 0 28), again 



in Taiping yulan 345 (quoting a Dunjia kaishan M ^ fit] ill H), and so on. A detailed 

fist of this kind of zhi is given in 8ss Taiqing jinque yuhua xianshu baji shenzhang san- 
huang neibi wen 2.7a ff. These sources, all 

but the last of an early date, may have provided the models on which the descriptions 
in our present text are based. 

Alfredo Cadonna 

Huangdi neijing lingshu lile ff ft St I® 

9 fols. 

1019 (fasc. 661) 

“Abbreviated Divine Pivot of the Internal Canon of the Yellow Emperor.” This text 
is composed entirely of quotations from chapters 24, 8, 47, 30, 18, 17, 71, 9, 75, 81, 80, 
and 69 of the Lingshu M til . These quotations are arranged into four groups, concern- 
ing the general structure of the body; the Six Qi (essence, breath, the yang humors 
[jin ($], the yin humors [yi #£], the blood, and the blood vessels); dementia; and 
aphonia. 

Before 1093, the year when Korea presented an edition of the Lingshu to China, this 
book was rare in its country of origin. The present abridged edition, by an unknown 
author, must be posterior to that date. The present book is mentioned in Song cata- 
logues (see VDL 146). 

Catherine Despeux 

Suwen rushi yunqi lun’ao 

3 juan 

By Liu Wenshu fpj im if ; 1099 

1022 (fasc. 664) 

“Discussion on the Arcana of the Circulation of Qi in the SuwenV This book is com- 
posed of thirty-one essays (only thirty are numbered), accompanied by twenty-seven 
drawings . There are also two “formulas” (jue ffe ) , which are in fact drawings of a hand with 
the emplacements of the cyclical signs of the Ten Trunks and Twelve Stems (fig. 14). 

The work studies the correspondences between the five cycles of the Five Agents 
(wood, fire, earth, metal, and water) and the Six Qi (heat, humidity, drought, cold- 
ness, wind, and warmth) during the sexagesimal cycle, on the one hand, and the 
circulation of qi in the energy tracts of the human body, on the other. The author 
considers the circulation of qi to be the very principle to be mastered for the applica- 
tion of the techniques of tonification and dispersion (preface, ia). The present treatise 
examines in a more detailed way the subjects of chapters 66 to 74 of the Suwen, which 
are attributed to Wang Bing by Lin Yi (1058-1064). The work was presented 
to the emperor (see Junzhai dushu zhi). 




[ 772 ] 3. A. 3 Medicine and Pharmacology 



3. A. 3 Medicine and Pharmacology [773 ] 




figure 14. Arrangement of the Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches on the hand: 
Amnemonic aid for counting in the sexagesimal cycle ( 1022 1.2a). Ming reprint of 
1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1010) 



The text itself is preceded by a preface of the author (dated 1099) and a table of 
contents. Of Liu Wenshu, we know only that he was a physician at court (preface, ia). 

The tide of this work is listed in the bibliographical chapter of the Song shi 
(207.5319) as having four juan. In other catalogues that describe Song editions, the 
present book is listed as comprising three juan, followed by 1021 Huangdi neijingsuwen 
yipian (in one juan), also attributed to Liu Wenshu (see Okanishi Tameto, Songyiqian 
yiji kao, 60-61). 

Catherine Despeux 



Huangdi bashiyi nan jing zuantu jujie Hi Ji? A + “ II IS U HI M 
7 juan 

By Li Jiong ^ ftt] , zi Ziye M , hao Xifan zi H# ; preface dated 1269 
1024 (fasc. 668-670) 

“Phrase-by-Phrase Glosses of the Eighty-one Difficulties of the Yellow Emperor’s 
Canon.” The author, a native of Linchuan in Jiangxi, also wrote a Wang Shuhe maijue 
jijie and a Touyouge jujie (see preface, ia). 



In spite of the great num- 
ber of commentaries written 
on the Nanjing prior to his 
own, Li Jiong quotes only 
two: those of Lii Guang § ]ff 
and Yang Xuancao US# 
(see preface, Huangdi bashiyi 
nan jing zhuyi tu xulun ff 

#A+-*«e«au* 

Ira, ia-b). The commentary 
by Lii Guang is quoted in Sui 
shu 34.1040, which reports 
that the Liang catalogue 
listed a Huangdi zhongnan 
jing (lost in the 

interim), annotated by Lii 
Bowang This was 

probably a byname of Lti 
Guang. Yang Xuancao lived at 
the beginning of the Tang (618-907). The Nanjing benyi it states that he was 

commander of the garrison of She county J'. 

The preface is dated 1269 and is followed by an illustrated introduction to the text, 
entitled “Introductory Illustrated Treatise on the Meaning and Commentary of the 
Eighty-one Difficulties.” Before Li Jiong, Ding Deyong Tfelffl wrote an illustrated 
commentary called the Buzhu nanjing SIM in five juan, dated 1062 (see Junzhai 
dushu zhi). The illustrations concern the first, second, third, eighth, and sixty-seventh 
difficulties, associated with the pulse and the ancient points of the energy tracts. They 
apply the theory of the Five Cycles and Six Qi (wuyun liuqi HjljAlfi) and establish 
a relationship between the twenty-four qi of the annual cycle and the twenty-four qi 
that are positioned on the body, from the head to the feet, or again on the radial artery 
on the wrist. Mention should be made of the representation (side view) of the Inner 
Landscape of the human body, (page 4a-b) with captions on the alchemical concepts 
and the topology of the body as found in the Shangqing scriptures (fig. 15). 

This introduction is followed by the main text, with glosses for each sentence. The 
Nanjing selects difficult passages in the Suwen for explication. Using the form of a 
dialogue, it discusses the pulse, energy tracts, organs, certain diseases, the points used 
by the ancients, and the methods for puncturing. The simple commentary is mainly 
of philological interest. Once or twice Li Jiong notes his emendations of erroneous 
characters. 




figure 15. The Inner Landscape ( 1024 “Xulun” 4a-b). Ming 
reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de 
France. (Chinois 9546/1012) 




[ 774 ] 3. A. 3 Medicine and Pharmacology 



3. A. 3 Medicine and Pharmacology [ 77 S ] 



A Yuan edition is described as having eight juan, preceded by nineteen folios of 
illustrations and an appendix in two folios with notes on die pronunciation of char- 
acters (see Yigu tang ji 17.12a). The present edition has only seven juan and seventeen 
folios of illustrations; the two folios on the pronunciation of characters are missing, as 
is the indication “corrected by Wang Weiyi” featured in the Yuan edition. 

Catherine Despeux 

Huang di neijing suwen yipian 

5 juan 

1021 (fasc. 663-664) 

“Lost Chapters of the Suwen of the Canon of the Yellow Emperor.” This is an an- 
notated edition of chapters 72 and 73 of the “Basic Questions” ( Suwen |?JJ ), entided 

“On the Techniques of Puncture,” and “On Fundamental Diseases.” These two chap- 
ters were lost in Wang Bing’s time. The poorly written text is for the most part 
composed of passages from other chapters of the Suwen. Without any doubt, this is a 
forgery (see Yu Jiaxi, Siku tiyao bianzheng , 667) 

Under the Song, this work was edited as a supplement to 1022 Suwen rushi yunqi 
lun’ao, by Liu Wenshu, and many catalogues attribute it to Liu. 

Catherine Despeux 

Jijiu xianfang 

11 juan 

Compiled 1444-1445 

1164 (fasc. 821-822) 

“Formulas of the Immortals for Relief of Emergencies.” The eleven juan so tided 
are actually parts of four or five unrelated books of different periods, conflated by the 
Daozang editors and given the tide of a work to which they are unrelated. This confu- 
sion was probably wrought by the Ming editors. The tide is not mentioned in Song 
catalogues (see VDL). The massive and oft- reprinted Korean Uibang yuchwi Wt /iMM 
contains a number of quotations from the original Jijiu xianfang. The quotations on 
obstetrics and gynecology are found in Yifang leiju 209.87, 212.46, 219.354, and 229.591 
and 602. Not only do these quotations differ from the Daozang text, but formulas 
with the same tide in the two books contain different ingredients (e.g., compare Jiyin 
dan jf?|i§; ;Ff 4.11a with Yifang leiju 146). 

The preface describes Jijiu xianfang as a book on childbirth, a description that fits 
only the first five juan. It is clear, however, that these five juan are not one book but 
two, or more probably three. The fourth book included under this tide is an important 
work that circulated widely among physicians. These four writings are not related 
to immortality practices or Taoism. They include no more symbolic therapy (that is. 



religious and magical remedies) than is normal in early medical formularies. The fifth 
book, however, is by a Taoist master and concerns what might be called dysfunctions 
of the Inner Gods. The works in this collection are best analyzed separately: 

1. Original tide unknown: a book on difficulties of pregnancy and childbirth with a 
preface by Xu Shouzhen yf flt in one folio and three juan. This is a conventional for- 
mulary, unusual only in that it does not include a broad range of women’s problems. 
The original text and its tide have not been identified, nor is the preface found in any 
extant work before the mid-fifteenth century. A book entided Taichan ftaM with the 
same preface by Xu is cited by Tamba no Mototane in Iseki ko 51.1247. Tamba gave this 
tide to a book in three juan, listed in the collection Qingnang zazuan WMMM (ca. 
1459), which actually cited the book as “Xu shi Taichan fang .ft iH fi •” It is likely 
that about half of the tides, including this one, were copied from the Daozang version 
of Jijiu xianfang. This lineage is not certain because the compiler was Shao Yizheng 
ffifJJE (d. 1462), a disciple of Liu Yuanran, himself a disciple of Zhao Yizhen. 
Zhao was the author of 116s Xianchuan waike bifang and a number of Taoist liturgical 
works. 

Hu Yujin in Siku quanshu zongmu tiyao buzheng, 816, attempts to identify 

the Jijiu xianfang with Liu’s lost Jiuji xianfang Ml ,H; fill fj , which is not recorded in 
the standard histories. Zhao’s collection includes both Jijiu xianfang, under separate 
tides assigned to its parts, and Jiji xianfang fill Jj , proving that the two books are 

distinct. 

The prescriptions in this formulary, like those in most similar books from the Song 
on, are, broadly speaking, developed and elaborated from those associated with the 
Han classic Jingui yaolue (196/220 a.d.). Because the prescriptions were 

copied from one book to another with minor variations, they do not provide a simple 
basis for dating. For instance, the first prescription in juan 1 is found, with minor varia- 
tions of wording, in the Xuanming lunfang (1172), attributed to Liu Wansu 

in Yitong zhengmai quanshu n.8a-8b. It is less likely that the one work copies 
from the other than that they are derived from a common source. 

2. Bianzheng shikuo (3-i46a-i7b). a small work on diagnosis and treat- 

ment of certain pediatric disorders. This mnemonic is not otherwise known, and may 
be a fragment of some more general book, or even of the preceding tide, although the 
latter’s preface does not refer to disorders of infants. 

3. Original tide unknown: cited as “Jiyin pin jf ^ no a formulary for difficulties of 
pregnancy and childbirth, in juan 4-5. In the anonymous preface the contents are said 
to be based on nutgrass rhizome (xiangfuzi fjfj] f [Cyperus rotundas]), but some of 
the prescriptions do not use this ingredient. 

4. Xianshou lishang xuduan fang fllj S fli ISfr fi (juan 6-9): “Formulas for 
the Healing of Injuries and Broken Bones, Revealed by an Immortal.” This work is 



[ 776 ] 3. A. 3 Medicine and Pharmacology 

liberally cited in the Ming encyclopedia Yongle dadian from which it was 

reconstituted in four juan for inclusion in the Siku quanshu [ZH 0 ^ II collection. 
Modern reprints are descended from the latter, and like it incorporate material from 
other books. The relevant portions of Yongle dadian are apparendy lost, but Xianshou 
lishang xuduan fang is quoted with equal liberality in medical compilations such as 
Uibang yuchwi. The anonymous author of the preface (reproduced here) attributes 
the book to a Lin daoren A, whom he places in 841/846. There is no evidence 
to connect this book with any Taoist movement. 

This work is considered by medical historians the oldest more or less intact mono- 
graph on external disorders. It includes descriptions of lesions and internal disorders 
of all sorts, not only traumas, and most of its chug formulas are for ingestion (this 
is the norm in classical writings on the topic). Three juan are quoted here under the 

original tide (juan 6-8), the first on boneset- 
ting, the second primarily on treatment for de- 
bilitation due to traumas and lesions, and the 
third on ding chuang ff SS , or boils. Juan 9 is 
given under a separate tide, Bichuan wuzbi pin 
(Secredy Transmitted Formulas 
for All Types of Hemorrhoids), but it is taken 
verbatim from the same source. None of the 
four juan is quoted in Uibang yuchwi. The lat- 
ter source gives quotations from the original 
Jijiu xianfang on knife wounds (185.619) and 
boils (179.408), but neither quotation corre- 
sponds to the Daozang text (cite both from 
volume 8 of the typeset Peking 1982 reprint). 
The contents are on the whole conventional 
dmg formulas. 

5. Shangqing ziting zhuilao xianfang _h/if 
^ Si cl Infill 77 (juan 10-11) : preface by an 
“old gentleman” ( loo sou 4? H ); a treatise 
on cadaver vector disorders ( cbuanshi (HP ) 
and debility disorders ( laozhai closely 

related groups of infectious maladies. Here 
these disorders are portrayed as “all due to 
the Three Corpse Worms and to possessing 
ghosts” (see Sivin, Chinese alchemy , s.v. and 
297-99). The Qingnang zazuan attributes 
this tractate to Zhao Yixin JtSfe, who is not 



3.A.3 Medicine and Pharmacology [ 777 ] 

otherwise known. The present text discusses 
and illustrates various insects and worms, but it 
is not concerned with modern helminthology 
(see fig. 16). The first three of these “worms” 
are in the form of a three-inch human, a ghost, 
and a frog. This text is an important source for 
its discussion of the six stages of these diseases, 
for its materials on gengshen 4* observances, 

and for its use of materials from popular 
healing, drawing on drugs, moxa, and ritual. 
The only idea not found elsewhere makes the 
Corpse Worms’ well-known periodic tour of 
the body into a circuit of certain moxibustion 
loci (fig. 17). 

The text ends with two “Illustrations of 
Huangdi’s method for treating the twenty-one 
types of debility disorders with moxibustion” (twenty-two loci are shown) and with 
apotropaic rites used against these maladies by Master Yuzhen i. fi A of the Jing- 
ming If Bff order. A testimonial by the King of Yue is said to have been trans- 
mitted three times between 937 and 1014, but the second of the three dates is clearly 
specious. It is given as the ninth year of the Chunhua if- It era, which lasted only five 
years (990-994; see 10.14b). 

An anecdote mentions a Master Li Tong ^ P 4 of Maoshan (10.15a), a liturgy 
entitled Dadi xuanke A 4? A 14 (10.13b), a Laojun sanshi jing zuan fZfpUMMW 
(10.13a), and a Qihrnng guangji lt£]S HIE. None of these are otherwise known. 

Nathan Sivin 

Xianchuan waike bifang fill fl| 14 77 

12 juan 

Compiled by Zhao Yizhen i§ 3 ti 3 l; d. 1382; edited by Liu Yuanran §lj$f| 

$5 (1351—14-31) 

1165 (fasc. 823-824) 

“Secret Formulas for External Medicine, Transmitted by the Immortals.” This work 
is a somewhat revised conflation of three collections: 

1. Xian chuan waike ji yan fang : the title is given in running heads. The 

preface of the Qingwei patriarch Zhao Yizhen attributes the work to Yang Qingsou 
who transmitted it to Wu Ningji whose son passed it to a Master 

Li from whom Zhao received it. It was printed once before 1378, and again 

along with item 2 below after being edited by Zhao’s disciple Liu Yuanran in 1395. 




i ^ A I fu )H 

f & m t £ $ 

A A -fr 




t 0 A 

£ # 
A > 

figure 16. Insects and worms in the 
human body (1164 10. 6b). Ming reprint 
of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/ 
1150) 




figure 17. Loci for moxibustion ( 1164 
11. 20a). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy 
of the Bibliotheque nationale de 
France. (Chinois 9546/1150) 




[ 778 ] 3. A. 3 Medicine and Pharmacology 



3.A.4 Neidan and Tangshcng [779] 




figure i8. Sores and rashes on the chest, abdomen, and breasts (ii6s 9.9b and ioa-b). Ming 
reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1151) 



The latter version and the Daozang edition differ in minor respects. The work is mainly 
on abscesses, rashes, boils, and other external ailments (fig. 18), but it includes a short 
mnemonic on variant drug names and a paragraph on the preparation of plant drugs 
(4.14b). 

2. Bichuan waike fang $$ fU (/ j- fj : anonymous; a colophon by Liu, written for the 

1395 printing, states that Zhao received it from Rong Kexiao nj |f , but Liu does not 

suggest Rong authored it. The Daozang version occupies juan 8-9. It omits two sec- 
tions at the end and the colophon. Juan 8 is a “general discussion” that may correspond 
to the Waike xu lun of Zhao mentioned in the bibliographical treatise of 

the Ming shi. Juan 9 is a collection of remedies for external disorders, including the 
effects of judicial beating and hemorrhoids. Its large illustrations of sores, rashes, and 
similar lesions are of special value. 

3. An unnamed and unidentified work labeled “Zhi zhuza cheng pin jpjjiiffili 

no”: treatments for miscellaneous syndromes, occupying juan 10-n in the Daozang 
version. This is a comprehensive formulary in which external disorders play a large 
but not predominant part. A discourse on leprosy is attributed to Shuran zi 
(n.8a), and a discussion on prevention of complications during recovery from Cold 
Damage Disorders ( shanghan rebing is attributed to Chunyang daoren of 

Ningchuan (11.1b). 

The 1395 editions of the first two constituent treatises are extant. The editors of 









( 



1 



! 



the reprint (Peking 1957) claim they also consulted the Daozang. There is no reason 
to doubt that the texts in the latter were produced from the 1395 edition, possibly by 
Liu’s disciple Shao Yizheng Sfi Jif IE , editor of the Zhengtong Daozang. 

Nathan Sivin 

Xiuzhen bilu 

11 fols. 

By Fu Duren KfJti'tH; after 1061 

850 (fasc. 573) 

“Arcane Notes on the Cultivation of the True [Nature].” This is a short work on 
dietary rules by Fu Duren, a registrar of Fengyang county in Shaanxi. The book is 
mentioned in the Bishu sheng xubiandao siku queshu mu 2.29b, but there the name of 
the author is erroneously written Fu Churen 

The text comprises essentially a long list of victuals of plant and animal origin, 
destined to reinforce the body or specific organs and to cure various ailments. The 
description of each of the various foodstuffs includes a main text extracted from a 
Materia Medica ( bencao $ 3 j£) followed by a sentence from an ancient commentary. 
With reference to the mule, the hedgehog (3b), and the chesmut (ib), the text quotes 
Meng Shen S Wi (ca. 621-ca. 713) of the Tang dynasty, but the description of persim- 
mon (5a) is followed by a quotation of Zhang Yuxi Ijt r $j Hj of the Song (cf. 769 Tujing 
yanyi bencao 29.17b, 32.2b, 35.18a, and 35.38a, respectively). Since Zhang’s writings 
transmitted in 769 Tujing yanyi bencao derive from his Jiayou bencao com- 

piled around 1061, our text must be posterior to that date. 

At the end of the text (iob-na), there is a passage quoted from an unidentified 
Tangsheng lun IKTIm recommending die absorption of worms in order to sustain the 
adept during the seventh and eighth months of each year. This kind of recommenda- 
tion is quite out of tune with the general style of the work. 

Part of the present text (ia-3a) is included by mistake in 837 Zhenzhongji na-i3a. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



3.A.4 Neidan and Yangshenjn 

During the Tang period (618-907), the practice of Inner Alchemy ( neidan p*q ) 
acquired a definite status among the important forms of Taoist practice. This status 
was due to a number of circumstances, which translated themselves on the scriptural 
level by the (re)appearance of works such as the Zhouyi cantong qi JS[ ^ In] (see 



i 




[ 7 &o ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Tangsheng 

part 2.A.i.d). However, Inner Alchemical discourse and Outer (laboratory) Alchemi- 
cal practice remained closely related, and in some instances it is difficult to say whether 
a given text concerns the one or the other form. 

This close relationship changes with the new era beginning in the Song (960-1297). 
The practice of Inner Alchemy is linked strongly to a number of saindy and divine 
patriarchs such as Lu Dongbin, whose hagiography strongly rejects laboratory al- 
chemy and who becomes a patron of Inner Alchemy (see, for instance, 263.14 Zhong-Lii 
chuandaoji). Here Inner Alchemy establishes itself as the major and orthodox practice 
for Tending Life and for the realization of the Tao within one’s own body. The other 
currents in Song neidan, such as the Wuzben pian f§ RH by Zhang Boduan, had 
the same influence. In consequence, virtually all Song and later texts on the subject 
of Tending Life (yangsheng MQi) encompass neidan. For this reason, a different cat- 
egorization applies in this period, since texts pertaining to Inner Alchemy were more 
closely associated with works on Tending Life techniques than with those concerning 
operative or laboratory alchemy. 

The present section first discusses general works, among which Zeng Zao’s 1017 
Daoshu stands out as the most important collection of texts. We then present the two 
main currents, the Zhong-Lii M S and the Wuzhenpian traditions. The former was to 
become very influential in the neidan practice of the (northern) Quanzhen dl- it order, 
whereas the latter would be the leading influence for the so-called Southern school 
(Nanzong |^th). The lineage of the Nanzong appears to have been constructed a 
posteriori by Bo Yuchan. The same patriarch also elaborated the tradition of the 
Shenxiao school of ritual. The connection between the Nanzong and the Shenxiao 
schools deserves further research. 

3.A.4.a General Works and Manuals 

Daoshu x 

42 juan 

Compiled by Zeng Zao zi Duanbo Jrfijffi, hao Zhiyou zi ca. 1151 

1017 (fasc. 641-648) 

“Pivot of the Tao.” This is a collection of texts dealing with the art of longev- 
ity, excerpted from Five Dynasties (907-960) and Song (960-1279) sources. The 
compiler, Zeng Zao (1091-1155), was an official during the reign of Emperor 
Gaozong (1127-1162; see Jinjiang xian zhi I# H ief. 12). The work is mentioned 
in the Suichu tang shumu 24a, without further details (VDL 154). Although the 
Daozang edition comprises forty-two juan divided into 118 pian H (sections), the 
Zhizhai shulujieti 12.349 notes twenty juan in 122 pian. Thus it is possible that four 
pian are missing from the present edition. However, the arrangement of Zeng’s 



3.A.4 Neidan and Tangsheng [ 7 S 1 ] 

compilation seems fairly complete: he begins with philosophical discussions on the 
Tao and ends with the most important neidan texts of the Zhong-Lii group (cf. 1191 
Bichuan Zhengyang zhenren lingbao bifa). Zeng Zao’s collection was completed by 
1151, since he mentions the last text of the Daoshu in a note of that date (cf. 263.17 
Zazhu jiejing 22 and 23). Zeng’s biographies of the immortals were also completed 
around this date (see preface, Jixian zhuan 43.24a). 

The Daoshu includes many interesting Northern Song (960-1127) treatises on Inner 
Alchemy and related subjects; these books, now lost as separate entities, are listed in 
many bibliographies of the Song and Yuan (1279-1368) dynasties. The main drawback 
of this compilation is the inaccuracy with which the texts were copied. Many passages 
were arbitrarily abridged, poems paraphrased, and often only parts of the original 
quotations are correctly reproduced. In view of these shortcomings, the Daoshu texts 
should be used with caution and the original should always be consulted if still extant. 
But despite these limitations, the Daoshu still remains an important tool as a source on 
lost Northern Song alchemical texts. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Miyazawa Masayori, “Dow no kosei ni tsuite”; “Dosu Goshinhen”; and “So Ichigyo.” 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Huandan zhouhou jue M ft M Ife 

3 juan 

Tenth or eleventh century 

915 (fasc. 592) 

“Manual for the Cyclically Transformed Elixir.” This treatise is an undated compila- 
tion of alchemical theory. The introduction (ia) states that the treatise corresponded to 
juan 10 of Ge Hong’s Zhouhou jue (cf. 1306 Gexianweng zhouhou beijifang), 

a chapter dealing with alchemy. The present work, however, derives its material from 
various sources. 

The text quotes Tao Zhi (d. 825; see 922 Huanjin shu) and a postscript dated 875 
(see 2.2a and 3.10a). Therefore the late ninth century is the earliest date for this com- 
pilation. On the other hand, the text mentions Lti Dongbin, a semilegendary figure 
popular during the early Song (960-1297). 

For the first section of juan 1 (ia-2sa), compare 913 Tongyoujue ia-2ob; for the rest 
(i.2ia-24a), see 947Tuqing neishu i7b-2ia. 

For the Longhu jinyi huandan xinjian hS iiz (15 }§ft T' $m (2.1a— 7b), see 1017 Dao- 
shu 14.1a— 6a which attributes the text toXuanhe zi ft] ft (cf. 1274 Xuanhezi shier yue 

gua jin jue). The Longhu jinyi huandan xinjian is quoted in 233 Huandan zhongxian lun 
3b (preface dated 1052) as Huandan xinjing jftft'L'ijt- This section of the present text 




[ 782 ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng 

comprises passages similar to 93s Danlun jue zhi xinjian and 936 Dahuan xinjian. The 
poem that follows (2.7b-9b) is paraphrased in 233 Huandan zbongxian lun 20a. 

Apart from some short alchemical essays, the rest of the work comprises alchemical 
poems and one “autobiographical” note by Wu Daling f'piill (dated 875; j.ioa-nb). 
The 124 8 Sandong qunxian lu (twelfth century) indicates a Chaohua si biji M \ t # It §£ 
as the source of this note. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Ma Ziran jindan koujue fl| A LI Uf 

3 fols. 

By Ma Ziran H Northern Song (960-1127)? 

1157 (fasc. 796) 

“Explication of the Elixir, by Ma Ziran.” Ma was a disciple of Liu Haichan (ia; 
see also his biography in the LZTT 49-na). He is often confounded with Ma Xiang J§ 

zi Ziran § (d. 856), but the LZTT makes a clear distinction between the two. 

He is said to have been a contemporary of Zhang Boduan (984-1082), who also 
dedicated a poem to him (cf. the latter’s preface to 1081 Jindan sibai zi). 

Ma Ziran’s koujue □ g£, a poem in seven-word verse, is partially paraphrased in 
1017 Daoshu 7.i5b-i6a (ca. 1150). There seems to have been a different version in circula- 
tion during the Yuan (1279-1368; cf. the long quotation in 141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen 
pian zhushu 5.11a). 

The poem begins with a criticism of other, “inferior” techniques. The author 
then describes his meeting with Liu Haichan and his subsequent enlightenment 
(bodhi HH). The Nine-Times-Transmuted Elixir ( jiuzbuan huandan AflMfl - ) cor- 
responds to bodhi-, it is defined as a state of enlightenment within the reach of anyone 
who practices introspection, and not as the exclusive domain of ordained Taoists or 
Buddhists (2a). The poem shows a strong influence of Chan Buddhism. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Zhenren Gao Xiangxian jindan tR Af}®,’ 

7 fols. 

By Gao Xian i %%,zi Xiangxian ^ % ; 1014 

1079 (fasc. 740) 

“Song of the Elixir by the Zhenren Gao Xiangxian.” The popularity of this poem in 
early Song times is illustrated by Zhang Boduan’s (984-1082) allusion to it in his 
Wuzhen pian fg 01 H (see 141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian zhushu 6.13a). It was also 
known under other titles, such as Gao Xiangxian ge iWi ^ and Dadao jindan ge A 

(see VDL 79). 



3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 783 ] 

In a short preface, an anonymous author relates his meeting with Gao Xiangxian 
of Quyang fj&J (Jiangsu) in the capital in 1013. A year later, he received this poem, to 
which he appended a commentary ( zhujie HM)- Neither the present version nor the 
Yulong wanshou guan 5 ^ H H IS edition seen by Lu You in 1166 (see Lu Fangweng 
ji 26.47) include a commentary to the poem, indicating that the present text was 
known in this form already during the Song dynasty (960-1279). Lu You also sug- 
gests that Gao Xiangxian was a famous scholar-official and calligrapher of the Shun- 
hua era (990-994) who disappeared, leaving the mundane world behind him. In the 
poem itself (5b), Gao claims to be the descendant of Gao Jichong j !5 $jf| (943-973), 
ruler of the kingdom of Nanping, who surrendered to the Song in 963 (see Song shi 

483.13953—55)- 

The poem describes a vision in which Gao Xian ascends to the Xihua fflj! palace. 
In this celestial abode, he receives neidan p*J instructions, based on the Cantong qi 
# foj , from the goddess Xihua furen A A- The description is followed by criti- 

cism of other, “inferior” techniques (5a) and by the transmission of a text entitled Chi- 
long tian shangjue ffctl A_hf&. Part of the poem is quoted in 1017 Daoshu 35.9a-9b. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Xuanhe zi shier yue gua jin jue A f D A A Ji A A Ul 

3 juan 

Before 1155 

1274 (fasc. 1003) 

“Master Xuanhe’s Golden Explanations on the Hexagrams of the Twelve Months.” 
This short text is included in 1017 Daoshu i4.6a-8b by Zeng Zao, where it is followed 
by an alchemical treatise of the Five Dynasties or the early Song (see 936 Dahuan xin- 
jian and 91s Huandan zhouhoujue 2.ia-7b). 

The text comprises twelve poems with commentaries, each of which corresponds to 
a hexagram. The text is concerned mainly with the process of purification of the two 
ingredients of the elixir (i.e., “true” lead and mercury). The purification takes place 
through the practice of fire-phasing ( huohou jcM)- The twelve hexagrams represent 
the increase and decrease of yin and yang during the months of the year or the double 
hours of the day. 

The Daoshu version is abridged, but it adds five sentences at the end that are miss- 
ing in the present text. The commentary in the Daoshu version is also more or less 
complete, but occasionally it is conflated with the poems. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 




[ 7*4 ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Tangsbeng 

Taixi baoyi gefifeM-M—WZ 

4 fols. 

Northern Song (960—1127)? 

827 (fasc. 570) 

“Song on Embryonic Breathing and [the Method of] Holding the One.” This short, 
anonymous work comprises an undated preface and twenty poems on the methods 
known as Holding the One. In the Bishu sheng xubiandao siku queshu mu catalogue 
2.28a, the tide is indicated as Baoyi taixi gejue JfiHKUg.Dcife, with Yang Xi as the 
author. But, since the preface (ia) quotes Yanluo zi, this text must date to the Five 
Dynasties (907-960) or later. Moreover, the preface lays emphasis on the circulation 
of qi instead of breath retention, the former being a widely practiced mediod during 
the Northern Song Dynasty. 

The poems show a clear Chan influence, evident also in many other Northern Song 
poems, such as die Wuzhen pian f§ RH (see, e.g., the last poem on page 3a of the 
present text). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Huandan zhiyao pian iS l 5 } M |§ 

5 fols. 

Wang Xianzhi zi Yingtu [(If [MI, hao Wuxuan zi f Song (960—1279)? 

1092 (fasc. 742) 

“Essays on the Circulating Elixir and Perfect Medicine.” This text consists often 
odes serving didactic purposes; it most likely corresponds to the similar tide listed in 
Tongzhi , “Yiwen lue,” 5.29a. Thus the work can be assumed to date to the eleventh 
century at the latest (see VDL 108). 

Wang Xianzhi had spent many years trying in vain to master operative alchemy. 
Some oral and secret instructions received from a zhenren, whose name remains un- 
disclosed, helped him to achieve “sudden enlightenment.” He also managed to realize 
the cultivation of “true essences,” in the sense of the neidan ft tradition. Circulating 

Elixir and Perfect Medicine designate the highest degree of cultivation. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Longhu jingwei lun 

8 fols. 

1259 (fasc. 999) 

“Discourse on the Subdeties of the Dragon and the Tiger.” This short, undated, 
and anonymous treatise comprises a preface, ten poems on neidan ft , and some 
respiration and gymnastics ( daoyin 'j [ ) techniques. The author criticizes laboratory 

alchemy ( waidan ); for him the only valid means of obtaining the elixir of im- 



3.A.4 Neidan and Tangsbeng [ 7*4 ] 

mortality is to follow the universal rhythm and to employ thcjing fjf (essence) and 
the qi of Heaven and Earth as ingredients. 

The alchemical oeuvre should begin with daoyin ( 6 a), and two methods are given 
in the text. These techniques are followed by the visualization of the four emblematic 
animals, which the adept should place according to their spatial orientation in the 
form of a mandala. The author concludes with fire-phasing, in which the adept regu- 
lates his or her breathing according to the hexagrams qian ijfc (Heaven) and kun 
(Earth). Qian designates the yang hours between midnight and noon; kun, the yin 
hours between noon and midnight. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Taixuan baodian 9 

3 juan 

Song (960-1279)? 

1034 (fasc. 703) 

“Precious Canon of the Greatest Mystery.” This is a handbook for Tending Life and 
Inner Alchemy. It is undated and unsigned but is mentioned in the Suichu tang shumu 
(VDL 90). It does not quote any outside sources. 

The many methods, recipes, and recommendations here assembled are mosdy of 
a practical nature. The author draws on a great variety of traditions. The proposed 
methods are mainly of a physical nature: refining breath energies, practicing Embry- 
onic Breathing ( taixi ;i-3b, 1.7a), keeping and refining the semen for men and the 

menstrual blood for women. From 1.7a on, the metaphorical language of neidan ft fl- 
is used. This use continues in 2.2b-4b. 

The methods range from simple recipes to more complicated ones. At the end of 
juan 1, the mastication of pine needles is advanced as a sure means to attain immor- 
tality. In 2.5b, we find that meditation and concentrating to the point of sweating 
profusely is the way to become a True Person. A method for concentrating on the 
body in order to make it transparent so that one can see inside one’s organs and vis- 
cera is described in 2.5a. Aura development is taught in 2.4b. Also ritual methods are 
recommended, such as the sending of petitions to Heaven (2.9b). The third juan is 
entirely devoted to medicinal herbs and concoctions, and to methods for making an 
immortal’s staff, a “wooden horse” ( muma ftM) drug that, when taken, allows one 
to walk fast. The final method permits adepts, by using a herbal concoction, to control 
their vitality and to know the time of their death in advance. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 




[ 786 ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 7*7 ] 



Jinjing lun 

6 fols. 

Northern Song (960-1127)? 

236 (fasc. 113) 

Discussions Concerning Gold and Crystal.” This is a short anonymous treatise on 
Inner Alchemy. By “crystal” the author means the radiance of the sun, while “gold” 
is the glow of the moon (preface, ia). The text is divided into three paragraphs ( pian 
^ ) ; at the end, there is a poem in eleven couplets, entided “Song on the True and False 
[Methods] of the Great Alchemical Elixir of Gold and Crystal, Lead and Mercury, 
Dragon and Tiger.” This poem appears to have been copied from another alchemical 
song by Qianzhen zi ]ff which figures in 237 Huandan xuanmiao tongyou ji under 

the tide “Verses Revealing the Marvelous and Penetrating the Arcane” {Xuanmiao 
tongyou shi compare the present text sa-b with 237 Tongyou ji 2b-3b). 

Gold and crystal here are symbolic homologues of other alchemical ingredients 
such as lead {qian In ) and quicksilver {gong ^). The true ingredients do not exist 
outside the human body. The practice, explained in allegorical terms, has distinct 
sexual overtones, its aim being to “return the crystal [i.e., the energy of the kidneys] 
in order to repair the brain” {huanjing bunao ill tSa M fl® ; 4b), a transparent disguise 
of the “return of the sperm” {buanjing jiff) in the sexual arts of Taoism. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Huandan xianmiao tongyou ji iH ft (tjt j§ ® H 

11 fols. 

By Qianzhen zi jf Mk; Northern Song (960-1127)? 

237 (fasc. 113) 

“Collection Revealing the Marvels and Penetrating the Arcana of the Alchemical 
Process.” The author, who signs Shaoshi shan Qianzhen zi (Master of 

the Hidden Truth from Mount Shaoshi; the mountain of the Songshan ]££ [_Lf range 
hi Henan and the location of the famous Shaolin si / p ' ^ , is otherwise unknown. 
In his undated preface, he states that he was inspired to write a “Poem Revealing the 
Marvels and Penetrating the Arcana of the Alchemical Process” (same tide as the pres- 
ent work) in thirty couplets after reading 238 Yuanyang zijinyiji. The poem, part of 
which has been incorporated in 236 Jinjing lun, describes the Inner Alchemical process 
of meditation on the union of the antithetical energies in the body. Coming after 
Yuanyang zi jcWi T ~ , but before 236 Jinjing lun , the present work should date from 
the Northern Song period. 

The collection comprises also an “Exegetical Hymn of the Great Alchemical Enter- 
prises by the Zhenren of Purple Smoke” (Ziyan zhenren jie dadan song 
k¥M$), as well the famous poem Spring in the Garden by the Qin River (Qinyuan 



chun (L'SHP), attributed to Lii Dongbin (see Baldrian-Hussein, “Yiieh-yang”). 
The latter poem is given twice here, each time with a different commentary. The first 
commentary, entided simply “Qinyuan chun” is anonymous. The second one, tided 
“Versified [Commentary] by He Xiangu on Lu Zhenren’s Qinyuan Chun [Ballad]” 
(He Xiangu song Lii zhenren Qinyuan chun fnj {[ljfe ^ § |J| k @1 # ) seems to be 

incomplete, as the commentary on the last lines is missing. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Baldrian-Hussein, “Yiieh-yang and Lii Tung-pin’s Ch’in-yiian ch’un.” 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang riyue bunyuan jing k Jl 0 0 

2 fols. 

656 (fasc. 343) 

“Book of the Sun and Moon and Their Origin in Chaos.” This is a short theo- 
retical neidan 0 treatise based on the Zhouyi cantong qi ]S[ H # [SJ . It is listed 
in the Chongwen zongmu (dated 1042) 9.18b as well as in later Song bibliographies 

(VDL94). 

Ma Lizhao’s commentary in 261 Jindanju 18a, which dates to the Yuan (1279-1368), 
names the present work, together with the Jinbi jing and the Zhouyi cantong 

qi. The quotations Ma gives of it on 19a and 27a can no longer be found in the present 
text, which must be a fragment of the original. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang haoyuan jing k Jl in 7C 

2 fols. 

659 (fasc. 344) 

“Scripture of the Vast Origin by the Most High Lord Lao.” This scripture is a 
rhymed, rhythmic text consisting of ten fines of four characters, with the remainder in 
seven-character verses that describe poetically the Inner Alchemical process. Respira- 
tory control, visualization of the Three Palaces within the human body and the deities 
residing therein— Shangyuantongzi_hjj;Ji“F or Nanji laoren [$] ® ^ A (upper pal- 
ace), Guxuan ^ ^ or Beiji zhenren 4 LM !H k (lower palace), and Linggui yunii ® ® 
5 tC (middle palace) — and the elimination of external desires set the inner circulation 
in motion and lead to the completion of the Divine Elixir {taizhen shendan k R ) 
and to longevity. 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 



[ 788 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Yanqsheng 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 789 ] 



Lingjian zi Mis’JT' 

22 fols. 

Attributed to Xu Xun ff j££, zi Jingyang probably Northern Song 

(960-1127) 

570 (fasc. 320) 

“Master of the Magical Sword.” The tide is an epithet for the third-century saint Xu 
Xun, as the latter, according to his legend, received from five young ladies a sword 
with which to fight demons (see 448 Xishcm Xu zhenren bashiwu hua lu i.7a-b). 

The Lingjian zi is mentioned in a Song catalogue of 1145 (see VDL 169), but as 
having two juan. It is possible that the next text in the Daozang, S 7 i Lingjian zi yindao 
ziwuji, which is not listed in the above-mentioned catalogue, originally occupied the 
second juan. The text of S 7 i Ziwuji is a logical sequel to the present Lingjian zi. 

Given that the date ante quem of the present work is 1145, and that the popularity 
of Xu Xun greatly increased after his canonization in 1x12 by Emperor Huizong, it 
seems likely that the present text dates form the eleventh or twelfth century. 

The present work gives the methods for abstaining from ordinary food and sus- 
taining oneself with breath (qi) in order to obtain immortality. This method is here 
considered to be a form of alchemy. The object is the creation of an immortal embryo. 
At the end of the work there is a description of sixteen gymnastic exercises, linked to 
the four seasons, to be performed as a preliminary stage to respiration exercises and 
Embryonic Breathing. 

Catherine Despeux 

Lingjian zi yindao ziwu ji ft «tj ^ | 

14 fols. 

Attributed to Xu Xun jH , zi Jinyang $£ ; Northern Song (960-1127) ? 

571 (fasc. 320) 

“Notes on the Induction of Qi from Zi to Wu, by the Master of the Magic Sword.” 
The text is composed of straightforward instructions, accompanied by a commentary 
that quotes many different sources. First (ia-5b), the instructions deal with gymnastics 
exercises and massage. Among the sources quoted, there are many Shangqing scrip- 
tures, such as 1016 Zhen’gao (juan 9) and 331 Taishang huangting neijing yujing . Next 
(6a-i2b), the text explains a number of concepts of Inner Alchemy, whereas the com- 
mentary quotes the Wuzhen pian tn RSI (the poems quoted do not exist any longer in 
the present version of that work, but are often quoted, for instance in 142 Ziyang zhen- 
ren Wuzhen pian sanzhu and the Cantongqi. The subtitle on 13a announces “Formulas 
for the Induction of Qi” (Yindao jue (7 1 *9 ). This part appears to be truncated. See 

also S70 Lingjian zi. 

Catherine Despeux 



Zhuzhen shengtai shenyongjue B IS fj& W ffl §£ 

16 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

826 (fasc. 570) 

“Divinely Efficacious Holy Womb Methods of the Host of Zhenren.” This is a 
small, anonymous, and undated manual for Embryonic Breathing techniques ( taixt 
(jplli')} composed of some thirty different methods. These methods are attributed 
to a great variety of saints of ancient and more recent times, including Yanluo zi, 
Bodhidharma (Damo chanshi iiJgfff StD, and Liu Haichan. This undated booklet 
should not, therefore, be earlier than the Song. However, it quotes much earlier mate- 
rial and does not include any texts related to the neidan p*3 f 3 } schools of the late Tang 
(618-907) and Song periods. A method attributed to an otherwise unknown zhenren 
of the Mysterious Gourd (Xuanhu zhenren Si SI R A 1 3 a— 4-a ) belongs to the school of 
internal refining ( neilian ), which links the spirits of the body with the hypostases 

of the Tao of liturgical Taoism ( Jiuku tianzun ^ ^ ^ , Lingbao tianzun MU 

etc.). This method is characteristic of the meditation methods of the Lingbao dafa M 

Kristofer Schipper 

Huangting neijing yujing zhu ff M ft m 5 . If t£ 

46 fols. 

By Liu Chuxuan §?| , hao Changsheng zi ft (fe-? (1147-1203) 

401 (fasc. 189) 

“Commentary on the Precious Book of the Inner Landscape of the Yellow Court. 
This is a commentary on 331 Taishang huangting neijing yujing by the Quanzhen ife M 
patriarch Liu Chuxuan . In the title, the author’s place of origin, which was Donglai 
near Ninghai in Shandong, is given as Shenshan W Uj (compare 1141 Xianleji 
i.a). Liu’s authorship of this commentary is mentioned by his biographers (seezpz Lishi 
zhenxian tidao tongjian xubian 2.7a and 973 Ganshui xianyuan lu 2.4b). 

The commentary is in short four-word poems ( siyan song H 3 S £§) of a simple di- 
dactic nature. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Tangming jiguan jindan zhenjue 

12 fols. 

572 (fasc. 320) 

“True Instructions Concerning the Gold-Elixir and the Knack of Tending Life.” 
This text contains thirty-six tracts by an unknown author and features neidan fl- 
practices. It gives a description of the basic, harmonizing elements or energies of 



[ 790 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng 

human nature. An equilibrium of the life forces can be achieved by means of breath 
control. The author recommends the meditative guidance of the vital energy on its 
way through the human body. The text describes the vision of the energetic circuits, 
the “palaces,” within the body that are reached in meditation. It also mentions the 
deities that reside in such palaces. The text appears to belong to the tradition of the 
Huangtmg jing ff Sill. The reader also finds instructions for the proper transmission 
of the practices it describes. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Jindtm zhenyi lun — |m 

23 fols. 

By Boxuan zi H late Northern Song (960-1127)? 

1080 (fasc. 741) 

“Discourses on the Gold-Elixir and the True One.” These discourses consist of 
explanations and quotations concerning theorems of operative and physiological al- 
chemy. This work has not been documented in bibliographies but may have been writ- 
ten during the Song dynasty (960-1279). It certainly does not predate the quotations 
of the YinJujing (jiff?#! (nb, identical with Li Quan’s commentary in 108 Huang di 
yinfu jing jizhu 2b). See also see the quotations of the Jinbijing by Ziyang ^ 

R§ (i.e., most likely, Zhang Boduan). 

The “magic elixir” originates in the qi (breath) of the True One. The relationship 
between these two elements can be compared with the relationship between child 
(elixir) and mother (breath). However, the focus is on operative alchemy, with its 
technical apparatus (such as the “elixir well”; 5b-6a) and its results (immortality). 
The text quotes and comments on many songs, odes, and alchemical books that the 
author of this work does not identify. The commentaries are clearly separated by the 
typography. Especially noticeable are the many quotations of the title Cantong qi # 

nm. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Sanyuan yanshou canzan shu EL ft M H # it H 

5 juan 

By Li Pengfei #H Jft, hao Jiuhua chengxin laoren A; first published 

in 1291 

851 (fasc. 574) 

“Book of the Three Principles for Longevity Equal to Heaven and Earth.” The 
expression canzan #ff in the tide comes from the Doctrine of the Mean ( Zhongyong 
chapter 22: “Whoever can assist in maintaining and promoting Heaven and 
Earth, he can be their equal” (cf. preface, 4a). 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 791 ] 

The present work is the sole surviving work of the author, who also wrote a Jiuji 
fang yiji ffr (see preface, ib). Li Pengfei (b. 1222) was a physician from 
Anhui. He was noted for his filial piety (see Yuan shi 197.4449). 

The text of the present book was reputedly transmitted to Li Pengfei by a sage near 
the Huai river. It was published in 1291 and in 1294, according to the prefaces, and 
again about 1338 by a governor of the province of Zhejiang (see the Siku quanshu 0 
edition), with a colophon by He Yuanbao fnj AfS, an agricultural official of 
the same province. 

The general introduction of the work describes the development of the embryo in 
terms that are similar to those found in the chapter “Entrance into the Matrix” of the 
Ratnakuta-sutra (Da baojijing 56.32615-3360), but for a few discrepancies concerning 
the first three weeks. Longevity of heavenly, earthly, and human origin is obtained, 
respectively, through nondispersion of seminal essence, regularity and measure in life- 
style, and alimentary hygiene. 

The final two juan of die work are devoted to Inner Alchemy. The author refers 
to Ma Ziran, Liu Haichan and Zhang Boduan. He quotes the texts of the 
Xishan jj§ |i| school of Inner Alchemy (see 5.4b). The diagrams concerning fire-phas- 
ing (4.sa-b) are similar to the one in 243 ChenXuboguizhong zhinan 1.4b; the diagram 
on the Unity of the Three (5.5a— b) resembles the one found in S76 Baoyi hansan bijue 
2.13a. 

Catherine Despeux 

Jichuan zhenren jiaozheng shu j 1 1 31 A If? 

9 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

902 (fasc. 588) 

“Methods Guaranteed by Jichuan [Ge Hong].” This is a small collection of neidan 
A formulas in the 1002 Zhouyi cantong qi fenzhang tongzben yi traditon. The work 
bears no relationship to 118s Baopu zi neipian . The first page features a table of transmis- 
sion, tracing the present methods from an anonymous master to Kou Shuyuan tSAX 
JJK, Zhou Huaxie JSj itM, Cui Huangguan IMif S (alias Cui Jingong A), and 
then to Xifang Zhongcheng M 77 and a number of others. The text itself is pre- 

sented as the teachings transmitted by Cui to Xifang and by the latter to Dai Daoheng 
Hie Hi ^ . All of these persons are otherwise unknown. A poem attributed to Zhenyi zi 
|H — (Peng Xiao) is found on 9a-b. 

Kristofer Scbipper 






i 



[ 792 ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



3 .A. 4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 793 ] 



Tuanshi bawei longwen jing jt A f g £ M. 

3 fols. 

30 (fasc. 2 7) 

“Eight Powers Dragon-Writ Scripture of the Primordial Beginning.” This book 
is composed of eight paragraphs of irregular, rhyming verses. It borrows from a Six 
Dynasties tide (361 Taishang dongxuan lingbao bawei zbaolong miaojing) but deals with 
modern practices. Using cosmological allusions, it summarizes the dialectic and the 
union of fire and water and of movement and rest that underlie the creation of the 
Superior Man ( zbiren SA)- 

John Lagerwey 

Lingbao guikong 

8 fols. 

By Zhao Yizhen ISlUi, hao Yuanyangzi (d. 1382) 

568 (fasc. 319) 

Lingbao Instructions for Returning to the Void.” The author was also known 
for his medical expertise (see 116s Xianchuan waike bifang and 1311 Xianquan ji 4.11a). 
The present work contains fourteen songs with commentaries. The songs comprise 
twenty-eight words each. 

The author explains that the life of humans is dominated by many uncertainties, not 
least by birth and death. Zhao Yizhen claimed to be editing and emending a text 
that had been erroneously attributed to Bodhidharma. He also rearranged the material 
in the form of songs, which he felt were more suitable for memorization (postface, 
7a-8a). The texts deal with meditative experiences like the premonitions of approach- 
ing death, coupled with moral instructions. If a “return to the Pure Land” and the 
liberation from profane affairs could be accomplished, the “dharma body” (fashen A 
# ) would manifest itself. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Tushi jing 

5 fols. 

By Li Chengzhi A; Yuan (1279-1368) 

1078 (fasc. 740) 

“Scripture of the Jade Room.” This scripture by Li Chengzhi of Caotan H?? in 
Dezhou (ii #| (Shandong) contains thirteen paragraphs, all of which feature aspects 
of neidan A J^- theory and practice. 

The work starts with a description of ways of behavior that endanger the vital ener- 
gies in the human body. The utensils processing yin and yang within the human body 
itself are called “incense burner” and “tripod.” They are surrounded by spiritual forces 



(ia-2a). No explanation is provided for the name “Jade Room.” The paragraphs deal 
with cosmic elements (the sun and the moon, 2a-2b, 3b), with Tijing J| If symbols, 
and also with general phenomena such as good and bad fortune in life (4a-b). The 
explanations culminate in expositions concerning xingming ft nr? , referring to the 
“nature” and “existence” of man. The basis for a realization of xingming is seen in 
individual integrity and also in the fulfillment of social obligations (5a). This didactic 
work may have formed part of Quanzhen ^ J| literature of the Yuan period. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Neidan huanyuanjue A Lf IS 7 t Uf 

4 fols. 

Yuan (1279-1368)? 

1098 (fasc. 743) 

“Instructions for the Return to the Original [State of Existence by Means of] 
Inner Alchemy.” This text contains expositions of the basic concepts of neidan or 
Inner Alchemy. The work is not documented in bibliographies and does not pro- 
vide any indications for a more precise date. However, the “instructions” appear to 
have been compiled at a rather late period (Yuan?) to serve as a summary of neidan 
teaching. 

The introductory passages explain that anyone interested in the cultivation of the 
Tao must be informed about the Five Elements, the Four Signs, the “reversal of the 
mutations due to the workings of yin and yang,” and so on. In fact, the text deals 
with only two of these subjects, namely, the Five Elements and Four Signs. First, the 
text sketches the development and the circulation of the energies that control the five 
intestines of the human body. In a similarly summary way it features the Four Signs (or 
Symbols) : jinweng the “gilded old man”; chanii the “young girl”; yinger 
S JL, the “small child”; and huangpo M the “yellow old woman.” The text attempts 

to define the meaning of these signs or symbols. The concluding passages of the text 
contain a short description of the bagua AfF and also refer to natural phenomena 
(lightning, wind, etc.) and bodily correspondences (physical organs). 

Florian C. Reiter 

Danjiaji fi ^ 

7 fols. 

Zhao Min flK, hao Jiangzhen zi Jl A ; Song (960-1279)? 

1093 (fasc. 742) 

“Collection of True and Superior Principles.” This work was compiled by Zhao 
Min, a native of Xi Qin in Gansu. It contains thirty poems about the achievement 
of Long Life. Each poem has fifty-six words. Zhao Min commends the methods of 



[ 794 ] 3 . A.4 Neidan and Tangsheng 



3.A.4 Neidan and Tangsheng [ 79 s ] 



Chen Tuan (Master Xiyi^r^). This reference could point to the Song as the period 
of compilation (ia). 

The poems present descriptions of the practices that lead to the achievement of 
immortality, and in this they follow the diction of neidan ft A . On the other hand, 
they appear to discuss the production of an elixir as well as its application and effects, 
such as arresting the process of aging (jb, 6a). The author claims to have experienced 
the effectiveness of the elixir (6a). His poems, he says, contain a true and complete 
account. However, oral instructions would still be indispensable, and all efforts would 
remain in vain as long as these instructions had not been obtained. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Jinyi dadan shi & ® jz ft 

14 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

1094 (fasc. 742) 

“Poems on Liquefied Gold and the Great Elixir.” This work comprises twenty-nine 
short poems, comprising forty words each. All of them convey neidan ftj 5 }- meta- 
phors. They appear to have been written during the Song period, although they do 
not provide any concrete indications as to their precise date. 

The poems describe creation with its essential elements and their symbols, which 
also govern the existence of human beings and their efforts to reach the Tao of Long 
Life (10a). The terms jinyi and dadan A in the title of this work are not ex- 

plained but appear to refer to such efforts of self-cultivation. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Taishang xiuzhen xuanzhang il lH % i? 

7 fols. 

Yuan (1279-1368) 

1043 (fasc. 724) 

“Arcane Essays on the Supreme Cultivation of True [Nature].” This text contains 
ten tracts dealing with physiological self-cultivation. The author is unknown. 

The basis for the expositions in this work is the understanding that xing ranks 
above ming a p (3a). Both concepts are central. They refer to “the being of humans” 
and to their “worldly existence.” These concepts are explained by means of the terms 
shen # (spiritual force) and qi %\ (vital energy). The ten essays feature conception, 
birth, and life, all of which depend on the above elements. These elements in turn 
have their basis in the cosmic energies of the Anterior Heaven (2a-3a). The essential 
precondition for any self-cultivation is said to be moderation in eating, drinking, and 
speaking, and also the avoidance of sleep (4b-5a). The mind has to be freed of any 



considerations and become void (5b). Many efforts have to be exerted to diminish yin 
and strengthen yang (7a). 

Florian C. Reiter 

Wuxuan pian H 

12 fols. 

By Yu Dongzhen ; preface dated 1229 

1046 (fasc. 725) 

“Essay on the Realization of the Mysteries.” This work presents didactic texts on 
how to become an immortal. It is essential for that purpose to eliminate yin and to 
strengthen yang. The means required to achieve this goal can be found within human- 
ity itself. Yu Dongzhen (1166-1250) was initiated into these secrets in Hangzhou. His 
preface is dated jichou BA, referring to 1229. References are made to Shi Tai and 
Bo Yuchan (6b, 9b), pointing to the neidan ft A tradition of the Southern Song 
(1127-1279) period. 

The “mysteries” mentioned in the title are the energetic and physical components 
of the human genesis, comprising the development and circulation of the vital ener- 
gies, and of spiritual forces and essences. Self-cultivation effects the reversal of the 
usual processes of physical developments, that is, the gradual deterioration of physi- 
cal potentials. The most important and guiding element is xin /fr (the mind). This 
text points to many practical and meditative methods, such as Holding the One, 
meditation, and medicine. The diction is esoteric. Details were to be left to oral in- 
struction. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Tuoyue zi if f 

8 fols. 

By Zhu Dongtian A, hao Tuoyue zi (A. 1350) 

1188 (fasc. 874) 

Tindan neipian PI; A ft IS 

3 fols. 

Appendix to 1188 Tuoyue zi 

1189 (fasc. 874) 

“Master Tuoyue” is a miscellanea by Zhu Dongtian, a Taoist of Longhu shan f| 1% 
LU in Jiangxi (cf. Sianji 21.6a). In the Daozang , the book is divided into two separate 
parts with different titles. However, the second title, 1189 Tindan neipian, should be 
considered an appendix to the main text. 

Part of the 1188 Tuoyue zi appears in the form of a dialogue between Tuoyue zi and a 
disciple; the matters discussed include correspondences between the macrocosm and 




[ 796 ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng 

the microcosm; the vital forces in human beings that follow the universal rhythm of 
Heaven and Earth; the Eight Trigrams (complete with six diagrams; those depicting 
Heaven and Earth are not divulged); and the final transformation and union with the 
Tao. 

The 1189 Tindan neipian comprises one short paragraph on sexual practice, followed 
by a commentary. Both text and commentary employ esoteric alchemical language. 

Farzeen Baldnan-Hussein 

Taibojing ^ S If 

11 fols. 

934 (fasc. 598) 

“Scripture on the Planet Venus.” It is possible that the tide uses the name Taibo 
& (Venus) to allude to the elements Metal/Gold and White Tiger. These two names 
belong to neidan [-*•] terminology. The introductory passages are the same as 9S0 
Shangdong xindan jingjue 3.ia-ib. The present work deals with the proper transmis- 
sion of instructions concerning the Gold-Elixir. 

The text speaks of ten types of people who were either able or unable to receive such 
instructions. It also refers to ten factors considered important for the production of 
the elixir, such as the circumstances and means of production. Although the conclud- 
ing remarks do not exclude explicitly operative alchemy (e.g., 7b, no. 4, concerning 
the “furnace”), many statements do refer to Tijing Jy$f correspondences and neidan 
concepts (see, e.g., 10b, da dantian for “lead”). The core process is seen in 

the reaction or compounding of “dragon” and “tiger” the symbolic “true essences” 
of the elixir (na). An ode by Shi Jianwu resumes this theme. A quotation taken 
from the commentary on the Tinfujing by Li Quan (9b) appears to be 

an extension of 110 Huangdi yinju jing shu 2.6b, suggesting that the present work was 
written, at the earliest, in the latter half of the Tang period (618-907) and probably 
much later. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Taishang yuanbao jinting wuwei miaojing 

18 fols. 

1399 (fasc. 1049) 

“Scripture on Ataraxy from the Golden Court of the Primal Treasure.” The terms 
yuanbao jz If and jinting do not appear in the text. The first term probably refers 

to the Primordial Qi (breath), and the second to the alchemical tripod ( ding ). The 

respiration that is the subject of this text is described as “work on emptiness” on that 
which has no fixed form, hence “ataraxy.” The text as a whole is a treatise on Inner 
Alchemy. The aim is the creation of the elixir ( jindan I^Tf) by the marriage of the 



3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 797 ] 

Five Elements. The text uses such terms as White Tiger, Green Dragon, True Water, 
and True Fire. All operations must be synchronized with the time of year. 

The text is divided into twenty-seven paragraphs, each of which contains “a word of 
the Tao,” followed in all but paragraph 20 by a commentary of the Queen Mother of 
the West. While there is progression from paragraph to paragraph, they hardly amount 
to a systematic expose. A certain number of original features may be pointed out: the 
heart is called the Hall of the Seal {yintang EP 'M . ), and mention is made of both a “fight 
of the vermilion seal” and a “vermilion palace seal.” The heart is called “the office of the 
spirit” and “the office of the emperor” whose name is Lord of the Jade Flower. The 
coccyx is identified with the Door of Earth, the niwan with the Gate of Heaven: 

the saint causes the water of his kidneys— called “divine water” or “energy-water”— to 
ascend and irrigate the niwan and then to fall, first into the Flower Pool and then into 
the Scarlet Palace. The heart’s fire must not be set burning fiercely by things outside the 
self: it must be kept for heating the alchemical tripod. The adept must “sublimate his 
qi” and “calm his spirit.” To calm his spirit he must put an end to all discursive thought 
and to desire. The term quanzhen i*: (j| (Complete Truth) appears twice in the text. 

John Lagerwey 

Jiuhuan qifan longhu jindan xili zhenjue 

9 fols. 

By Cheng Zhao fMHS, zi Shiming ±EIfj; Northern Song (960-1127)? 

229 (fasc. 112) 

“True Method Explaining the Theory of the Nine-Times-Transformed and Seven- 
Times-Transmuted Dragon-and-Tiger Elixir.” This is a small treatise on Inner Alchemy; 
the author is otherwise unknown. According to our text, in the renshen 3 & ^ year of 
the Great Song the author met a Taoist recluse by the name of Siming yeke 0 Ejfj S? 
^ who taught Cheng, at his request, the principles of the art of Inner Alchemy. The 
present book contains their dialogue. 

The explanations quote the well-known Zhouyi cantong qi Jqj H ^ [nl as well as 
the Longhu jing ■ The text mentions famous masters of the past such as Yan- 

luo zi, Qingxia zi W ia 'P , and Cui Xuanzhen (fit (fl. 741-756), the author of 
13s Cui gong ruyao jing zhujie and is mentioned here in relation to an unknown Long- 
taijing nltpfS?- The text also mentions the Five Dynasties (907-960) or early Song 
alchemist Yuanyang (see 238 Tuanyang zijinyiji). All these elements refer 

to the early stage of Inner Alchemy, and the work therefore may date to the Northern 
Song period, the year renshen standing for either 1032 or 1092. 

Kristofer Schipper 



[ 79i ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 799 ] 



Xiudan miaoyong zbili lun flf£ Ff MSf* 

io fols. 

Northern Song (960-1127)? 

234 (fasc. 113) 

‘Treatise on the Supreme Reasons and Marvelous Results of the Practice of Al- 
chemy.” This short theoretical work has an unsigned preface and nine chapters (plan 
H ) corresponding to the nine stages of the alchemical process. The preface men- 
tions an alternative, possibly the original, title: “Short Instructions for Fire-Phasing” 
(Huohou juelue Phase 8 comprises the construction of an altar on which 

the alchemical tripod is placed. The master and his disciple ascend the altar in order 
to supervise the fire-phasing. Although the description is realistic, this phase appears 
to be part of a meditative process, since in the preface the author rejects all forms of 
operative alchemy. 

Most of the sources quoted, such as the Yuhu song 3 iff 21 (4b), are either Tang 
(618-907) or Five Dynasties (907-960). Some sources date to the early Song, for 
instance, a work by Liu Haichan (4b). The text should therefore belong to the 
Northern Song period. 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Zhizhen zi longhu dadan shi M Jl -p f I jt. ft 

8 fols. 

Zhou Fang Jlj 77 , zi Guiyi If — , hao Zhizhen zi M 31 -p ; preface 1026 

269 (fasc. 132) 

“Poems on the Great Elixir of the Dragon and the Tiger, by Master Zhizhen.” An 
anonymous preface dated 1026 says that the author of the poems was a certain Zhou 
Fang, a Taoist of Shaoshi shan UL| (Henan). 

The present text, however, was presented to the emperor by the official Lu Tian lit 

. The latter’s official tide corresponds exacdy to that of Lu Tianji an official 

who is known to have presented another alchemical text to the throne between mi 
and 1117 (see 90s Cantong qi wu xianglei biycw ia). It seems that the character ji !H was 
omitted here inadvertently. 

The work comprises thirty-two poems on the elixir. According to the preface, this 
elixir is not based on plants or minerals. The text of the poems in general could apply 
to Inner or Outer Alchemy alike. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



Xu zbenjun sbihan ji R li Lt Hi Hd 

2 juan 

Attributed to Xu Xun fj'M,zi Jingyang ® p§ ; Southern Song (1127-1279)? 

951 (fasc. 601) 

“Notes from the Stone Box of Zhenren Xu.” This is an alchemical handbook that, 
according to the undated preface, corresponds to the nine chapters of esoteric in- 
structions left behind in a stone box by the famous immortal Xu Xun when he rose 
up to heaven in broad daylight with his house and family. The box was found by an 
official named Zhang jjg. Later the Taoist master Xie Guanfu <$•!§&! Ill transmitted it 
to his disciples Zhu Mingshu and Zheng Daoquan from Dongjia 0 

H (Sichuan). Xie Guanfu is Xie Shouhao, hao Guanfu W<§. (1134-1212)- He is the 
author of 770 Hunyuan shengji and who lived at the Yulong gong on Xishan 

® LU, the center of Xu J ingyang’s worship. Zhu Mingshu and Zheng Daoquan are 
otherwise unknown. 

The work is not mentioned in Song catalogues. The story of the stone box left 
behind by Xu Xun is well known from his hagiography at least since Southern Song 
times (see 440 Xu taishi zhenjun tuzhuan 2.18b). The Daozang typography observes the 
Song taboo for the character kuang HL. 

The work quotes many operative alchemical terms but does not contain any recipe 
or instructions for laboratory alchemy. It is closer to Inner Alchemy, as it uses many 
concepts and theories related to the Cantong qi #[a}§§ and similar texts. Here also, 
the discourse remains theoretical and, above all, literary; nothing of practical use is 
revealed. 

Kristofer Scbipper and Yuan Bingling 

Zazhu jiejing ft -?f W 

9 juan 

Yuan (1279-1368)? 

263.1 7 Xiuzhen shishu 17-25 (fasc. 125) 

“Shortcut to the Tao: A Miscellany.” Siku quanshu zongntu 147.3078 lists a Xiuzhen 
jiejing in nine juan compiled by Yu Juehua 5^ |S , zi Rongfu , from Jian’an jtl 

(Fujian) during the reign period Zhiyuan (1335-1340). Both the description of the 
work and the number of juan correspond exactly to our text. This work is a typical col- 
lection of On the Cultivation of Perfection (xiuzhen ^ ) texts: it includes breathing 

exercises, physiological treatises on the Five Viscera, descriptions of the body, daoyin 
*9 ‘j | (gymnastics) techniques, and poems on these subjects. 

Some of the texts are unique; for instance, juan 18 contains illustrations and ex- 
planations of various centers in the head and body by Yanluo zi; juan 19, “Baduan 




[ 8oo ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Yangshcng 



3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 801 ] 



% $ 

a SL + -p — 
-L 19. gi I*. 

eg J& j=. # $) -$r 

+ £• f# 



» * 

3K » =.-*- 
**.*■ + *f 






jt a 

A' 

iis. .=. m.& sl 

-fit -h*j(L 



& f S £ £- 'Jto 



% 



-h'S' to Bl 

‘III 



A, #■ Uti 
<*- r£ A ',%' 




FIGURE 19. The baduanjin or Eight Lengths of Brocade method (263 19.43-5!)) 



jin fa A!£i$x£,” has illustrations of daoyin techniques (fig. 19), with text ascribed to 
Zhongli Quan (see die translation in Maspero, “Methods,” 547-48). 

For the “Cuixu pian ^ fM M ” in juan 17 and the “Tianyuan ruyao jing XtC Alii 
fH” in juan 21.6b ff., see also the articles on 1096 Chen xiansheng neidan jue and 13s Cui 
gong ruyao jing zhujie. 

Juan 22-23 comprise poems and a'-lyrics by Zeng Zao (d. 1155) and his friends. 

Juan 21 contains eighty-one anonymous verses on Tending Life techniques {yang- 
sheng 3t£); juan 24 and 25 are on the same subject. The Tiandi jiaoshen lun AifijS! 
ttli (2j.ia-2b) is an excerpt from 1191 Bichuan Zhengyang zhenren lingbao hifa. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



3.A.4.b The Zhong-Lii Tradition 

Zhong-Lii chuandaoji fit B fU jiltfii 
3 juan 

Attributed to Zhongli Quan MMWl; compilation attributed to Lii Yan S 
W ; transmitted by Shi Jianwu Jfti/Pi cf; Northern Song (960-1127)? 

263.14 Xiuzhen shishu 14-16 (fasc. 124) 

“Zhongli Quan’s Transmission of the Art [of Immortality] to Lii Dongbin: A Col- 
lection.” This work belongs to a group of texts ascribed to the legendary Zhongli 
Quan and his disciple Lii Dongbin. These texts are generally referred to in other 
Dewzang works as the Zhong-Lii H § texts (on these, see 1191 Bichuan Zhengyang 
zhenren lingbao bifa and 246 Xishan qunxian huizhenji). 

Although the present tide is first mentioned in Zhizhai shulujieti 12.348, there is a 
complete, if slighdy abridged, version in ioizDaoshu (ca. 1150), entided Chuandaopian 
H . The Song shi, “Yiwen zhi,” 4.5190 writes Zhenxian Infill chuandaoji, and the Ming 
work Daoyan neiwai bijue quanshu {Zangwai daoshu 6:61-101) indicates yet another 
tide: Zhong-Lii erxian Af|l| chuandao ji (this edition has an additional paragraph at 
the end). 

In the Yuan dynasty (1279-1368), the authorship of this work was ascribed to 
Shi Jianwu; Yu Yan, for instance, refers to it as Shi Qizhen’s JI (i.e., Shi 
Jianwu’s) Zhong-Lii chuandao ji (see 100s Zhouyi cantong qifahui 8.3a; see also the 
discussion in 30s Chunyang dijun shenhua miaotongji 5.14b). 

The Chuandao ji is presented as a dialogue between Zhongli Quan and Lii 
Dongbin. It is divided into eighteen topics of discussion dealing with different 
aspects of Inner Alchemy, beginning with the different degrees of immortality and 
ending with transfiguration. The content is mainly theoretical, with occasional allu- 
sions to practice. The work defines itself (i6.i3a-b) as a theoretical background to 1191 
Lingbao bifa, which explains the practical exercises in detail. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Bichuan Zhengyang zhenren lingbao bifa f|J iE [»U R A M ?£ 

3 juan 

Attributed to Zhongli Quan IS M. I® , zi Yunfang MM, hao Zhengyang 
zhenren IE R A ; transmitted by Lii Yan lfjf,zi Dongbin jJW] fjj[ , hao 
Chunyang zhenren R A ; Northern Song (960-1279) 

1191 (fasc. 874) 

“Secret Transmission of Master Zhengyang’s Complete Methods of the Sacred 
Jewel.” This work is ascribed to the legendary Han Taoist, Zhongli Quan; it is 
said to have been transmitted by his disciple Lu Dongbin, a semilegendary figure 




[ 802 ] 3 .A .4 Ncidan and Tangsheng 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangsheng [ 803 ] 



of the Tang (618-907) dynasty (preface). The book, however, is first mentioned in the 

Tongzhi, “Yiwen liie,” 5.31a as Zhongli shou Liigong lingbao bifa 

in ten juan (Juan must be an error for the sections into which die book is divided). 

Lu Dongbin and Zhongli Quan are considered the authors of a series of nei- 
dan texts, known as the Zhong-Lii group (cf. the preface to 246 Xishan qunxian 
huizhenji and Baldrian-Hussein, Proce'de's secrets , 41 ff.). The present book is a con- 
tinuation of another Zhong-Lii work (cf. 263.14 Zhong-Lii chuandaoji [Xiuzhen shishu 
16.13a— 13b]). A Yuan source attributes the authorship of the texts to Shi Jianwu (cf. 
30s Chunyang dijun shenhua miaotongji 2.9a and 5.14b), putative author of 246 Xishan 
qunxian huizhenji, another important Zhong-Lii text. Both Zhongli Quan and 
Lu Dongbin were acknowledged as patriarchs of Taoist schools that emphasized 
Inner Alchemy, such as the Quanzhen jiao ^ iJt %. in the north, and later the Nanzong 

7K in die south. 

The methods described in the text were excerpted from a Lingbao jing MU!? 
in thirty juan, which Zhongli Quan discovered in a cave in the Zhongnan 
Mountains in Shaanxi (preface, ia). Zhongli classified three juan into three sections, 
representing the Three Vehicles (sancheng H^l), or the “three stages of accomplish- 
ment” ( sancheng H file). The three stages are further subdivided into ten sections 
(preface; see also 263.14 Zhong-Lii chuan daoji [Xiuzhen shishu 16.13b]). 

The first stage comprises four sections describing methods of breath control and 
gymnastics. The next stage, in three sections, deals with methods of circulating the qi 
and inner fluids of the body. The final stage, in three sections, concerns methods of 
meditation and transfiguration. 

A slighdy abridged version of the present text is included in 1017 Daoshu (early 
twelfth century). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Baldrian-Hussein, Proce'de's secrets. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



Xiuzhen taiji hunyuan tu fi^ B ^ ® ill 7C [SI 
18 fols. 

Xiao Daocun Iff hao Hunyi zi if- — -f; Northern Song (960-1127) 

149 (fasc. 68) 

“Diagrams on the Mystery of Ultimate and Primordial Chaos for the Cultivation of 
True Nature” (fig. 20). This is an illustrated treatise of the so-called Zhong-Lii tradi- 
tion (see 1191 Bichuan Zhengyang zhenren lingbao bifa). According to the preface, the 
author of the treatise based himself on a work by Shi Jianwu known as theXiulian 
i&M taiji hunyuan tu, but this title is otherwise unknown. 




figure 20. The Ten Islands of the Blessed, for 
visualization in meditation. In the foreground, 
the Purple Residence of the Taiwei zhenjun; 
above it, the remaining nine islands in clusters 
of three ( 149 8 a) 



The diagrams and quotations contained in this work illustrate the methods of the 
system followed by the Zhong-Lii school as it is expounded, for instance, in the “Xiu- 
zhen zhtxuan pian ff| (ft } b S IS ’’ in 1017 Daoshu i9.9a-22a. 

The short preface attributed to Jin Quanzi jfc Jkf- and describing the transmission 
of the Xiuzhen zhixuan tu ff| JjHiSfH is clearly out of place here, as it actually deals 
with the next text in the canon: iso Xiuzhen taiji hunyuan zhixuan tu. 

The present treatise is concerned mainly with the theoretical order of the micro- 
cosm, the circulation and union of the internal fluids (qi M. and yi i$), and, finally, 
the transfiguration of the adept. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Xiuzhen taiji hunyuan zhixuan tu\ 

9 fols. 

Song (before 1154) 

150 (fasc. 68) 

“Diagram [Illustrating] the Mystery of the Cultivation of Truth, of the Supreme 
Pole, and the Primordial Chaos.” This is a text that belongs to the Zhong-Lii group 
(cf. 1191 Bichuan Zhengyang zhenren lingbao bifa). Its preface by Jin Quanzi , zi 




[ 804 ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng 

Zhupo Yji& of Hangzhou, was erroneously placed at the beginning of the preceding 
work, 149 Xiuzben taiji hunyuan tu, perhaps by the editors of the Daozang. One Jin 
Zhupo jfcYlifc of the Tang dynasty (618-907) is indicated as the author of 923 Dadan 
qiangong lun, but this work has been shown to be a forgery of the Southern Song 
(1127-1279). 

The authorship of the preface poses another problem, since the same preface with 
minor variations is ascribed to Li Song ^ (a disciple of Shi Jianwu and compiler 

of 246 Xishan qunxian huizhenji) in 124S Sandong qunxian lu 14.22a, a work dated 1154. 
Whereas Jin Quanzi describes his encounter with Shi Jianwu as having occurred 
in Nanking, Li’s preface has Nanjing Yingtian fu j$f m Kg , the name used during 

the Dazhong xiangfu period (1008-1016). The present text can therefore be placed 
between this period and 1154. 

The text comprises nine diagrams and a collection of short formulas (jut r |£) illus- 
trating the practical methods explained in the Xiuzben zhixuan pian ff§£ jR f h £ IS (1017 
Daoshu I9.9a-22a); however, it includes only a list of the names of the techniques 
employed, without any practical instrucdons. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Xishan qunxian huizhen ji H lit f$ fill # (R IE 
5 juan 

Attributed to Shi Jianwu Sfg/i ff, zi Xisheng #|g, hew Qingxu dongtian 
Huayang zhenren j# K k (fl. 820); compiled by Li Song zi 
Quanmei i£=fe,hao Sanxian men dizi tianxia du xianke 
t=r; Northern Song (960-1127) 

246 (fasc. 116) 

“Record of the Immortals of the Huizhen [Hall] on Xishan.” This work belongs to 
a group of neidan texts inspired by the patriarchs Zhongli Quan and Lu Yan (cf. 
1191 Bichuan Zhengyang zhenren lingbao bifa). It is attributed to the well-known poet 
Shi Jianwu, a recluse of Xishan in Jiangxi. The compiler, Li Song, was a disciple of 
Shi Jianwu (cf. 1248 Sandong qunxian lu 14.22a). 

Already during the Song dynasty (960-1279), the attribution of its authorship 
to Shi Jianwu was contested: the Zhizhai shulu jieti 12.348 considers the Tang 
(618-907) poet and the author of our text as two different persons of the same name. 
Moreover, internal evidence from the text itself proves that this work was compiled, 
at the earliest, toward the end of the tenth century: 1.6a mentions Zhang Mengqian 
who appears to have died in 998 (see Shanxi tongzhi quoted in 

Gujin tushu jicheng , “Shenyi dian” juan 252). 

The present tide first occurs in the Suichu tang shumu (VDL 108). The Junzhai 
dushu zhi lists a Qunxian huizhenji in five juan subdivided into twenty-five pian H, 



3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 80s ] 

corresponding to the present version. The 1248 Sandong qunxian lu 16.3a quotes a 
biography of Shi Jianwu from the Xishan huizhen ji, which, however, does not 
figure in the present work. A slightly abridged version of the present text is found in 
1017 Daoshu 38. 

The preface, ascribed to Shi Jianwu, is linked to two traditions: it mentions the 
twelve saints of Xishan as well as Zhongli Quan and Lu Dongbin. It explains 
that each of the five juan corresponds to one qi of the Five Elements. Each of the twen- 
ty-five sections of this work quotes a Taoist text, in most cases the Xishan ji ffi lillE, 
referring apparently to an antecedent of the present work. The themes discussed are: 
recognition (of masters, methods, the Way, etc.); nourishment (of the vital principle, 
qi, etc.); reparation of damage (due to diminished qi, vitality, etc.); true alchemical 
ingredients (yin and yang, lead, mercury, etc.); transmutation (and perfection of the 
body, spirit, etc.). The theory and the practical procedures described are less detailed 
than those of 1191 Lingbao bifa. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Jinbi wu xianglei cantong qi ^ |§ 2 f @ # IrJ §5 

3 juan 

Preface and commentary ascribed to Yin Changsheng JIjL; after 947 

904 (fasc. 588-589) 

“Book of Azure Gold and the Theory of Categories of the Kinship of the Five.” This 
is an Inner Alchemical treatise attributed to Yin Changsheng of the Han dynasty. It is 
mentioned for the first time, however, in the Tongzhi , “Yiwen liie” 5.6b, which notes 
only one juan. The work comprises a preface and poems with commentaries. The first 
sentence of the preface is a definition of the Cantong qi # [r] ^ by Peng Xiao, from 
his postface of 947 (cf. 1003 Zhouyi cantong qi dingqi ge mingjing tu na). This quotation, 
which is also repeated in the commentary, does not preclude the possibility that the 
poems are of a much older date. 

Another version in 1017 Daoshu 34 consists of a dialogue between two legendary 
Taoists, Yunya zi ff 5 ?^- and Yuanyang zi jtMj-f-. The poems, paraphrased, are at- 
tributed to the former, and the commentary to the latter. The first two poems and their 
commentaries, as well as some other passages in the middle of the text, are missing 
from the Daoshu version, which, moreover, follows a slightly different sequence in the 
presentation of the poems. The commentary, too, is often abridged. 

The technical terms employed are, with a few exceptions, similar to those of the 
Zhong-Lii group of texts, such as 1191 Bichuan Zhengyang zhenren lingbao bifa. Since 
these texts are of the Northern Song date, the present work must belong to the same 
period. Moreover, famous Taoist books are often referred to as scriptures (jing f? ), a 
usage current during the Northern Song. 




[ 8o6 ] 3 . A.4 Neidan and Tangsheng 



3.A.4 Neidan and Tangsheng [ 807 ] 



The text is divided into eighteen sections, of which number 6 is missing. These 
sections trace the development of Inner Alchemical practice, from the technique 
known as “collecting the medicine” to the formation of the immortal embryo and 
transfiguration. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Liaomin g pian 7 ^ is 

14 fols. 

By Master Song xiansheng compiled by Mao Rixin 7 B $T; preface 1168 

272 (fasc. 133) 

“Book of Comprehension.” This is a collection of poems ascribed to a Master Song, 
who is said to have received instruction directly from the legendary Zhongli Quan 
H M ® in 1165 (preface, ia). Shortly afterward, Mao Rixin met Song in Jiangsu, where 
he obtained this work (preface, ib). 

The collection comprises a preface by Mao Rixin followed by poems written in 
various styles by Song. The longest section consists of a series of thirty poems entitled 
“He Langran zi Jindao shi 7 lil 4 ^ 74 t;il!I 7 (2a-9b), written to match the style of 
the thirty poems by Liu Xiyue M # JJ (see 271 Taixuan langran zi Jindao shi). 

The rest of the work (9b-i4b) comprises d-lyric poems on Inner Alchemical 
themes. These poems are inspired by the Qinyuan chun ?£•> [Ml H attributed to Lu 
Dongbin ( 136 Lii Chunyang zhenren Qinyuan chun danci zhujie). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Zhuzhen lun huandan jue R Ira i§ BF 

5 fols. 

Northern Song (960-1127) 

230 (fasc. 112) 

“Formulas of the Perfected on the Cyclically Transformed Elixir.” This is a short 
collection of alchemical poems ascribed to a number of Taoist worthies. Although the 
compilation is not listed in any of the catalogues, most of the material is quoted in 
Song texts. 

The first poem, “Yuhu song jEfifil,” is incomplete; see 1017 Daoshu 12.5b, which 
describes the transmission of the poems by Taiyi zhenren 7 — ( 7 ) H A to Zhong- 
tiao zi 47 $: 7 - The poem is also quoted in a Tang or Five Dynasties work as “Taiyi 
zhenren yuhu song 7 ~ '[J| AHUSFII” (cf. 1080 Jindan zhenyi lun 10b). 

Chen Guofu has traced the Qingxia zi if ®f 7 poems on the basis of rhyme analy- 
sis ( Daozang yuanliu xukao, 236) to the southern dynasties of Qi, Chen, and Liang 
(479-589). Although this provenance may be doubtful, at least one of the poems is 
quoted in a Five Dynasties text (266 Jinyi huandan baiwenjue 18b). 



For die “Rongcheng gong neidan gejue ^ 7 aft a£ ” see BPZ 16.28. Our 

text reproduces only half of the BPZ poem and has changed the last line. A slighdy 
different version of the poem is quoted in 234 Xiudan muwyong zhili lun 6a as Yuan- 
huang shangjing 

The last poem by Cao Shengtu HUH (kao Tanxuan zi $£ 7 ) is a short extract 
from the Qiangong wuxing tu Ip 77(7 HI mentioned in Chongwen zongntu 9.2.3b 
(read |&7 for I£ 7 ) and other Song catalogues (VDL 154). A slighdy different ver- 
sion figures in 1017 Daoshu 30.1a. 

All the poems are on alchemical themes; Cao Shengtu’s poem, however, is clearly 
on neidan 7 . 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Chen Guofii, Daozang yuanliu xukao, 317. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Zhenyi jindan jue R — * sfe J 5 } I£ 

9 fols. 

Wang Chang 7 # ; Song (960-1279) 

231 (fasc. 112) 

“Explication Concerning the Elixir of the True One.” This is a spurious work at- 
tributed to Zhongli Quan, Lii Dongbin, and Shi Jianwu. The author, Wang 
Chang, traces the transmission of the text and states that it was hidden in a cave by 
Shi Jianwu. 

The text itself is divided into two sections. The first section comprises poems on the 
three methods of the Tinju jing followed by a short essay on the circulation 

of qi through various points of the body. The nomenclature and the theory are similar 
to the Zhong-Lii texts of the Northern Song (see, for example, 1017 Daoshu 19.9a ff). 

The second section, entided “Taixi jieyao (Essentials of Embryonic 

Respiration) is devoted to this subject. A passage (7a) figures in 826 Zhuzhen shengtai 
shenyong jue 2b, where it is entided “Yuqi fa Another paragraph (7b) is a 

quotation from YJQQ 5910b. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Zhenxian bichuan huohoufa j| fill £0 Wf 7 M ?£ 

9 fols. 

Late Song (960-1279)? 

274 (fasc. 133) 

“The True Immortal’s Secret Transmission of Fire-Phasing Techniques.” This un- 
dated work is divided into two sections. The first section (ia-4a) is based partly on lost 
texts such as the “Xiuzhen zhixuan pian ff£ H tit 7 H ” (1017 Daoshu 19; cf., for example. 






[ 808 ] 3 . A. 4 Netdan and Yatigsheng 



3.A.4 Neidan and Tangsbcng [ S09 ] 



12b and ia-ib of our text), the “Jindan nijin pian (1017 Daoshu 23), and 

on texts preserved in the Daozang, such as 246 Xishan qunxian huizhenji (1017 Daoshu 
38) and 1191 Bichuan Zhengyang zhenrm lingbao bifa (1017 Daoshu 42). This last work 
seems to have inspired the author of our text in his choice of the title. Since many of 
the books mentioned above are of the twelfth century, the present work is later than 
that period. The second section (4a-9a) comprises affirmations of a certain Fangbian 
zhenren ifrfigRA. 

The fire-phasing ( huohou AfS ) methods are based on Zhong-Lii techniques, with 
a few variations (see, e.g., 7b). The main methods described are those of the celestial 
revolution type ( zhoutian huohou IU A A f(5l )■ Other techniques include the art of con- 
ducting the seminal essence to repair the brain ( huanjing bunao j§ fit liii ) and of cir- 
culating qi. The description and the macrocosmic and microcosmic correspondences, 
accompanied by symbols from the Tying are similar to those of the Zhong-Lii 
texts. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Taishang jiuyao xinyin miaojing A _h ft S? 'll' EP H 

9 fols. 

Attributed to Zhang Guolao Song (960-1279)? 

225 (fasc. 112) 

“Marvelous Book of the Nine Essentials Heart Seal of the Most High.” This is a 
short treatise on neidan attributed to Zhang Guolao (eighth century) but 
containing numerous technical terms current in the texts of the Zhong-Lii school from 
the Northern Song (960-1127) period (e.g. sanhuo HA, sanyang H[*§, or lianshen 
hedao M W o" jilt ; compare, for instance, Xishan qunxian huizhenji 4.2b, 9b; 5.8b). The 
author seems to have been inspired by 660 Hunyuan bajing zhenjing (compare 3.4b-5b 
of that text with the first pages of the work under discussion). The present text also 
uses expressions from the Yinfujing such zsfuguo anmin qiangbing 

zhansheng and shenxian baoyi — (3b). 

The text is composed of nine sections. These, according to the preface, correspond 
to the phases of the Nine-Times-Transmuted Elixir ( jiuzhuan ft If). The term xinyin 
'CAP refers to the spiritual transmission that brings the disciple to a sudden under- 
standing of the workings of the universe. 

The nine sections comprise discussions on topics concerning the Real One and the 
Three Ones, as well as respiration, fire-phasing, and, finally, embryonic respiration and 
meditation. 

The use of the term xinyin as well as the mention, in the last section of the work 
(7b), of Bodhidharma show an influence from Chan Buddhism, of the kind percep- 
tible in treatises on embryonic respiration since Tang times. The Tongzhi , “Yiwen lue ,” 



5.20b (VDL93) mentions a now lost Xinyin taixi tuike miaodaojue 'lAPfp 
jjf§& in one juan. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Cunshen guqi lun ^[ 51 ^,* 

7 fols. 

577 (fasc. 321) 

“Discourse on Holding the Spirit and Strenghtening the Qi.” This is a short com- 
pilation without any indication of date or authorship. It contains two kinds of texts: 
thirteen short explanations (ia-jb) concerning fundamental physiological procedures 
and two short essays: the “Xingshen jumiao fa (Method for the Tran- 

scendance of Both Body and Spirit; 6a-b) and the “Zhongyuan pian (Essay 

on the Middle Origin; 7a-b). The short explanations constitute the outline of a neidan 
[Aj pj- program. The two essays are markedly different in style: they are less didactic 
and contain quotations. They may date from an earlier period. 

Vincent Goossaert 

Taishang changwen dadong lingbao youxuan shangpin miaojing 

12 fols. 

991 (fasc. 619) 

“Essay of the Most High, a Scripture of the Upper Section of the Dark Mystery of 
the Numinous Treasure of the Great Cavern.” This is a work on the subject of Inner 
Alchemy. The nineteen paragraphs of the text are all “words of the Tao”; the first ten 
paragraphs describe the structure of the universe and the body; the last nine provide 
the responses of a master to a disciple concerning various forms of practice. 

According to the first part of the book. Great Extremity (Taiji AH*) and Great 
Simplicity (Taisu A^), which existed before the separation of Heaven and Earth, 
are both “in the image of the Great One” but Great Simplicity is identified with the 
west and the production of metal (Jin ), and Great Extremity with the south and the 

production of cinnabar (dan fl-). According to the practical half of the book, it takes 
1,000 days for the jindan to “knot,” 2,000 days for the “embryo of the saint” 
to form in the Central Palace, and 3,000 days for the accomplishment of the “great 
undertaking.” 

In language and system, this text is close to 263.14 Zhong-Lii chuandao ji (Xiuzhen 
shishu 14-16). On two occasions, however, it refers to the qi of the heart as the “breath 
of the True Origin” (zhenyuan zhi qi R jt JL M ; 6b, 11a), which suggests a possible link 
to the True Origin school of Inner Alchemy (cf. 57 Shangfang tianzun shuo Zhenyuan 
tongxian daojing ). 

John Lagerwey 




[ 8io ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng 






3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ Sii ] 



Taishang changwen dadong lingbao youxuan shangpin miaojing fahui 

19 fols. 

992 (fasc. 619) 

Elaboration on the Essay of the Most High.” This text presents itself as an elabora- 
tion ( fahui of 991 Taishang changwen dadong lingbao youxuan shangpin miaojing. 

A note at the beginning states: “The meaning of the Changwen dadong jing and of the 
five paragraphs of methods (?) is obscure. I fear that latter-day adepts will have dif- 
ficulty following it. That is why I have devised a thirty-day system. Do not transmit it 
to the unworthy! Conceal it!” 

The present text is indeed divided into thirty parts, one for each day of the sixth 
month (the reason for this choice is not made clear; the paragraphs for the fifth and 
sixth days are missing). The author does comment on some phrases from the preced- 
ing text, but he also introduces a number of new concepts: the True Yin and the True 
Yang, die seventy-two periods ( hou fi), the River Chariot ( heju (nf$), the Yellow 
Lady {huangpo H ), and others. He also insists repeatedly on the moral aspects of 
the Way of the immortals, which he assimilates to the Way of the gods (shendao jfii) 
and the Way of the buddhas ( fodao f$})jf). There are references to a Gujing and 
to the Longhu shangjing 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang huadao dushi xianjing jfc _h ft ill fit fill M. 

14 fols. 

648 (fasc. 342) 

Scripture of the Immortals of the Most High for Transformation into the Tao and 
Salvation from the World.” This is a summary of Inner Alchemy composed of three 
sections of verse and a commentary. The titles of the three sections are ‘Transforma- 
tion into the Tao,” “The Five Phases,” and “The Principle of the Mystery.” The com- 
mentary uses terminology from the Lingbao bifa ( 263.14 Zhong-Lu chuandao 

ji [Xiuzhen shishu 14-16]). The whole text is preceded by an introduction in the manner 
of a Lingbao scripture, presenting the text as a sermon of the Most High. This work 
concludes with some practical ritual instructions. 

John Lagerwey 

Neidan bijue 1 ^ LF M 

11 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

1085 (fasc. 741) 

Secret Instructions Concerning the Gold-Elixir.” This work is a compilation of 
unknown origin. It contains prose, poems, and songs about the Gold-Elixir, which 



represents the elements and results of meditative self-cultivation. This text is not docu- 
mented in bibliographies, but it is most likely a product of the Song period. 

The text mentions Taoists of the Tang (618-907) and Wudai (907-960) periods 
including Zhang Guo (9a) andMA Ziran (6a). Zhongli Quan, Lti Yan and 
Liu Haichan (2b, 7a). The text was shaped by the southern traditions associated 
with Liu Haichan and Ma Ziran (cf. iiS7 Ma Ziran jindan koujue). 

The text deals with the gradual apprehension of xing and ming hr (being and 
existence), and it stresses the importance of the “true nature” ( zhenxing R 14 ). 

Florian C. Reiter 

Jindan zhengzong 

11 fols. 

Hu Huncheng SfljjlfiSc, hao Xuanxue jinshi Song (960-1279)? 

1087 (fasc. 742) 

“Correct Line of Transmission of the Gold-Elixir.” The author was a native of Wu- 
ling 2 IH (Henan). This text focuses on the neidan f}- tradition, which is under- 
stood to be analogous to operative alchemy (3b). This text, which was written during 
the Song period at the earliest, is not documented in bibliographies. 

The work sets out presenting some cosmogonic descriptions. The Original Breath 
of the Anterior Heaven (2a), which governs the life of humanity, appears to be the 
most vital element. It is the object of the corresponding concept of self-cultivation. 
The Posterior Heaven, or postnatal existence, is the reality that has to be seen in op- 
position to the faculties of the Anterior Heaven. Self-cultivation, which is based on a 
revelation made by Laozi, has to be performed according to three stages: first comes 
the (interior) establishment of the “furnaces,” then the “concentration of the medi- 
cal essences” and finally the (proper) “fire-phasing.” The author of this work gained 
these insights when he mysteriously met with an unknown immortal, who “may have 
been a person like Lii Yan or Zhongli Quan” (9a). Hu Huncheng concludes his work 
with a series of twelve short poems (duanju £3 "nj ) that contain the teachings of his 
anonymous master. The poems use an indirect, veiled diction. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Zheng dao ge 

5 fols. 

By Zuozhang zi £ 3 jS 2 ; Northern Song (960-1127) 

1095 (fasc. 743) 

“Songs Bearing Witness to the Tao.” The text is listed in the Bishu sheng xubiandao 
siku queshu mu (VDL 165). The identity of the author is unknown. The preface indi- 
cates that the fifteen neidan songs are inspired by the tradition of the Xiaodao 
school of the Xishan 0 (JL| near Nanchang. 



[ Si 2 ] 3 .A. 4 Neidan and Yanffshenq 



3.A.4 Neidan and Tangsheng [ Si} ] 



The title Zhengdao ge has been given to a variety of texts. A poem by this name at- 
tributed to He Xiangu Mfliltt can be found in 263 Xiuzben shishu 22.1b. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Yangsheng yongxuan ji 

27 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

843 (fasc. 573) 

“Collection [of Poems] on the Cultivation of Life and in Praise of the Mysteries.” 
This collection consists of thirty anonymous verses. Each verse consists of twenty- 
eight words. Commentaries on each sentence are provided. The poems summarize 
essential points in the scriptures concerning the achievement of Long Life and the 
liberation from the entanglements of the profane world. 

The poems focus on key terms of the neidan pg tradition, such as the Cinna- 
bar Fields and Embryonic Breathing. They also deal with specific procedures like 
the “cultivation of the yang [forces] and the diminution of yin .” The explanations 
of these terms include quotations, for example, of the Neiguan jing (2a, 

2b; see 641 Taishang laojun neiguan jing 4a, 3b), or of a statement by Qizhen zi that 
can be found in 1017 Daoshu 30.11a. The quotation of the Neiguan jing suggests that 
this work was written in the period of the Five Dynasties (907-960) or the Song 
(960-1279). 

Florian C. Reiter 

3.A.4.C The Wuzhen plan and the Southern School 

(Nanzong) 

The Wuzhen pian fig fill (Essay on the [Immediate] Awakening to Truth) is an im- 
portant alchemical work by Zhang Boduan (984-1082) ofTiantai Xta (Zhejiang). 
Zhang’s original name was Boduan f[=J iffi] , which he later changed to Yongcheng ^ 

(var. M). The earliest information about Zhang Boduan is supplied by the author 
himself in a preface and a postface to this work. In the preface, dated 1075, he men- 
tions having served Lu Shen H ( i.e., Lu Longtu H II III , 1022-1070) in Chengdu; 
he notes that during this period he received instructions from a Taoist immortal on 
ingredients and fire phasing for the alchemical elixir (141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian 
zhushu, preface 16a). Later, he wrote the Wuzhen pian, a work that encompasses both 
the techniques of prolonging life (corresponding to ming op, destiny) and of reverting 
to one’s original nature (i.e., xing ). In the postface, dated 1078, he describes himself 
as a follower of the sixth Chan patriarch, Huineng ( 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu, 

postface 3b). He also claims to have divulged alchemical secrets three times, but each 



time he suffered misfortune. He therefore wrote the Wuzhen pian in order to instruct 
later adepts indirectly. 

Further biographical details can be found in the Wuzhen pian ji fg W M (before 

1173) by Lu Shen’s grandson, Lu Sicheng and in the Zhang zhenren benmo ‘M 

MX XX (early thirteenth century? See 142 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian sanzhu and 
143 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen zhizhi xiangshuo sancheng biyao). Both these sources were 
used for Zhang Boduan’s biography in LZIT 49. 

According to the Wuzhen pian ji, Zhang Boduan was demoted and banished 
to Guangnan xi Hf ® (Guangxi), where he was employed by Lu Shen. Lu was later 
transferred to Chengdu and died there. After the death of Lu Shen, Zhang served a 
certain Ma Mo HR, to whom he later offered his book. The Wuzhen pian ji also 
identifies Zhang Boduan’s mysterious teacher as Liu Haichan. 

The Zhang zhenren benmo repeats the same information in part but adds the story 
of Zhang Boduan’s visit to the official Huang Shang MS? during the Zhenghe 
period (1111-1118). 

It is known that during Huizong’s reign (1100-1125), there was a great interest in 
Taoist books. Since Huang Shang was the official responsible for having woodblocks 
cut for the printing of the Daozang , it is possible that he received the Wuzhen pian 
from someone using Zhang Boduan’s name. But apart from an undated preface 
by Shi Tai (d. 1158) to 1091 Huanyuan pian, and another doubtful one attributed to 
Shi TaTs disciple Xue Daoguang and dated 1115 (see below; also cf. thcXueZixian 
shiji #!K in 143 Wuzhen zhizhi xiangshuo), there are hardly any traces of the 

book before the mid-twelfth century. 

The Wuzhen pian is first listed in the Junzhai dushu zhi (VDL 118) as Tongxuan biyao 
wuzhen pian RH in one juan. But we find it quoted frequently in earlier 

works. It is included in 1017 Daoshu 18.9b by Zeng Zao (d. 1155) and in 1248 Sandong 
qunxian lu 2.9b (preface 1154) and 688 Daode zhenjing zhijie 2.12a (preface 1159). In 
1161 a first commentary was written (cf. 263.26 Wuzhen pian [ Xiuzhen shishu 26-30]). A 
second commentary, dated 1169 or 1173, followed (see 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu). From 
this time on, Zhang Boduan’s fame (and that of his book) was gready enhanced. 

During the Shunxi era (1174-1189), a Taoist claiming to be Zhang Boduan 
himself visited the latter’s grandson (cf. Zhang’s biography in the Jiading Chicheng 
zhi 35.12b). In 1196, a bridge in Tiantai XX was officially named Wuzhen qiao fg R 

. In the following year, the name of the place where Zhang is said to have written 
the Wuzhen pian was changed to Wuzhen fang t§ fi fg , and later a temple was built 
there in his honor ( Jiading Chicheng zhi 31.7b and 2.14a). 

In 1202, the first commentary was reedited (see 263.26 Wuzhen pian). Another com- 
mentary, by Xia Yuanding JJjnM, was completed about 1226 (146 Ziyang zhenren 
Wuzhen pian jiangyi). 




[ 814 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangsheng 



Around 1330 Chen Zhixu compiled a work that included three commentaries 
(142 Wuzhen pian sanzhu). Another compilation of approximately the same date is 141 
Wuzben pian zhushu (preface 1335). 

Several lines of transmission of Zhang Boduan’s teachings, both direct and 
indirect, were known during the thirteenth century. The direct lineage that follows is 
given by Bo Yuchan in “Xie Zhang Ziyang shu Hf® (263 Xiuzhen shishu 

6.4a): Zhang Boduan (d. io82);ShiTai (d. 1158) ;Xue Shi (i.e.,XuE Dao- 
guang, d. 1191); Chen Nan (d. 1213); Bo Yuchan (fl. early thirteenth century). 
By the mid-thirteenth century, this group was extended to Peng Si and his disciple 
Xiao Tingzhi # 517 ? (see the latter’s introduction, dated 1260, in 687 Daode zhenjing 
sanjie, preface, 7a-b). 

The main characteristic of this group is that it did not produce a single commentary 
to the Wuzhen pian but expressed itself in verse, the collections being entided pian M ■ 
Hence we have the Huanyuan pian (bySHi Tai), the Huandan fuming pian 

Hfftl oril§ (byXuE Daoguang), and the Cuixupian WlMM (by Chen Nan), 
all three preserved in the Daozang. 

The second line of transmission is more difficult to trace, owing to the insistence on 
anonymity that prevailed within it. The first source for this group is a preface by Chen 
Daling M'MM dated 1174 (141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian zhushu , preface 5a), which 
gives the following lineage: Wuzhen xianweng fill il (i.e., Zhang Boduan); 
Guangyi zi III fft-p (fl. 1138-1168); Wuming zi (A- 1173). In the Yuan dynasty 

(1279-1368), the fist was extended by Lin Jing, hao Yuanyang zi, in a postface (cf. isi 
Jinyi huandan yinzheng tu 17b) : from Wuming zi to Ruoyi zi and Longmei zi 

SI/It 1 (fl. 1218). 

The first group of the second line of transmission was identified by Dai Qizong as 
Liu Yongnian §§>] 7 %^-, hao Guangyi shunli zi liSSIjO-p, and Weng Baoguang, 
zi Yuanming $?j fjf] , hao Wuming zi (cf. 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu, preface 5a and 12b). 
The characters Wuming zi ~P, meaning “anonymous,” gave rise to a bitter quar- 
rel about the true identity of the author of the commentary. For some commentators, 
including Dai Qizong, the author was clearly Weng Baoguang, but for others, 
such as the editor of 142 Wuzhen pian sanzhu, the commentary was the work of Xue 
Daoguang (see 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu). 

The dispute over the authorship of the Wuming zi commentary was provoked by 
the question of the authenticity of a particular version of the Wuzhen pian. This prob- 
lem led each owner of the text to declare his own version to be the only genuine one 
and to elaborate a complete line of transmission of the text. 

There were already many editions of the Wuzhen pian available during the Southern 
Song when Lu Sicheng wrote the Wuzhen pianji. Lu had inherited the book from his 
father. It was an edition that went back to the official Ma Mo, under whom Zhang 



3 . A . 4 Neidan and Tangsheng [ 81s ] 



Boduan had served. Lu Sicheng reiterates the authenticity of his edition, at the same 
time giving us some examples of the variants in other editions (see below, Wuzhen 
pian ji” in 142 Wuzhen pian sanzhu). This “true edition” ( zhenhen £R$) was later 
obtained by Weng Baoguang (preface 1173) in the region of Lake Dongting. On the 
transmission and editions of the Wuzhen pian, see also the article on 141 Wuzhen pian 
zhushu below. 

The title Wuzhen pian was originally, at least during the early years of the Southern 
Song, applied to a set of eighty-one poems (cf. 1017 Daoshu 18.9b and 1248 Sandong 
qunxian lu 2.9b). Zhang Boduan himself states in his preface that the Wuzhen pian 
comprised eighty-one verses ( 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu , preface 16b). Of these verses, the 
number of the first sixteen, two times eight (erba zhi shu ), stood for the bal- 

ance ofYin and Yang. The following sixty-four verses were intended as an explanation of 
the sixty-four hexagrams of the Tijing H IS • The last verse expressed the magnificence 
of Great Unity (Taiyi i:— ). Zhang later added twelve alchemical a'-lyrics (to the tune 
of Xijiang yue ) and, finally, thirty-two poems on various Buddhist subjects. 

Despite this clear description of the contents, the order of the poems in the extant 
editions is often in disarray. This work 14s Wuzhen pian zhushi contains only fifteen 
instead of the sixteen introductory poems; 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu includes only two 
of the thirty-two Buddhist poems, whereas 142 Wuzhen pian sanzhu omits them com- 
pletely. Some of the Xijiang yue ct-lyrics are missing from 146 Wuzhen pian jiangyi. 
Only 263.26 Wuzhen pian follows Zhang Boduan’s outline, but even here several 
more poems have been added. 

Additions and omissions are not the only problem. Three of the five Wuzhen pian 
texts in the Daozang present the poems in practically the same numerical order. The 
Siku quanshu edition of Wuzhen pian zhushu does likewise, but the Daozang 

edition of the latter and 14s Wuzhen pian zhushi change the order completely. The vari- 
ants in the different editions raise further questions. 

The key to these problems lies in the nature of the work itself. Written in the same 
obscure fashion as the famous Zhouyi cantong qi |aj 0 R , the book is open to 
manifold interpretations: is its subject neidan 1^1 hf (theoretical alchemy), or is it a 
manual of sexual techniques? As a neidan book, moreover, it could be used by each 
master to express his own ideas. The poems were used separately as individual koujue 
P (oral instructions), which explains why some versions present them in a different 
numerical order. 

The Wuzhen pian was widely accepted as a commentary on the Cantong qi (cf. Fang 
Hui’s 77 [MI remarks in Tongjiang xuji 31.17a). The interpretation by the commentators, 
however, differed widely. The earliest commentary by Ye Wenshu explained 

the work in terms of the day an j\. system of the Xici iff appendix to the Tijing 
(see 263.26 Wuzhen pian). Weng Baoguang employed Tinju jing terminology to 




[ 8t6 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Ttmgsheng 

explain the alchemical process, culminating in the “great cyclically transformed elixir 
of liquefied gold nine- times transmuted” (jiuzhuan jinyi da huandan A, I# 

; 141 Wuzhen pian zhusbu , preface 10b). Xia Yuanding JCjclfff , according to 
Fang Hui, interpreted the book as a manual on gymnastics and breathing techniques 
(Tongjiang xuji 31.17a). 

That the Wuzhen pian was linked to sexual techniques is evident since all the com- 
mentators lament its misinterpretation. They also refute energetically the idea that its 
contents resemble the methods of Zhang Sanfeng a reputed master of sexual 

techniques. Zhang Boduan’s biography in the Zhang zhenren benmo was clearly 
invented to aid in this refutation (cf. 143 Sancheng biyao 15b; see also Boyun zi’s preface 
of 1204, 14b, and Dai Qizong’s comments on 22b). This misinterpretation persisted 
nevertheless, judging from the quotations in 878 Zituan danjing, a book on dual cul- 
tivation. 

Wuzhen pian In R IS 

5 juan 

By Zhang Boduan (984-1082); commentaries by Ye Shibiao 

zi Wenshu (dated 1161), and Yuan Gongfu (dated 1202) 

263.26 Xiuzhen shishu 26-30 (fasc. 126-127) 

“Essay on the [Immediate] Awakening to Truth.” This work is a collection of the 
oldest commentaries on the Wuzhen pian; it was compiled by Yuan Gongfu in 1202 (cf. 
143 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen zhizhi xiangshuo sancheng biyao 19b). The text in five juan 
is mentioned in Zhizhai shulujieti 12.349 with its complete tide: Wuzhen pian jizhu fg 
R H IS ji . The present version has no prefaces, but the Yuan author Dai Qizong iic |E 
zk possessed an edition that included prefaces by Ye Wenshu and Yuan Gongfu, dated 
1161 and 1202, respectively (see 143 Sancheng biyao 19b, 20a). Ye Wenshu’s commentary 
is, moreover, criticized in a preface dated 1173 ( 141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian zhushu , 
preface 8b). Apart from Ye Wenshu’s commentary, the collection includes commen- 
taries by Weng Baoguang or by Xue Daoguang (see 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu 
and 143 Wuzhen zhizhi xiangshuo sancheng biyao). These commentaries were excerpted 
from different editions and versions and are therefore introduced by two different 
names, Xlangchuan weng J^)1[H and Wuming zi 44)4 (see, e.g., 26.i8a-i8b). 

The original Ye Wenshu commentary ended with a series of diagrams by the author, 
entided “Wuzhen pian waizhuan f§ (see 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu , preface 

8b). The present version includes some diagrams and five poems but does not indicate 
the name of the author. The diagrams, entided “Danfang baojian tu Af M I? Im Ifil 
are reproduced in 1068 Shangyang zijindan dayao tu 8a-iob (ca. 1331) under the tide 
“Ziyang danfang baojian zhi tu M U M 4 . B •” 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangsheng [ 817 ] 

The commentaries quote many important alchemical works such as the Cantong 
qi and related texts; the latest datable work is a commentary by Wang Dao ill (cf. 
996 Guwen longhujing zhushu, preface dated 1185). According to Weng Baoguang, 
Ye Wenshu’s commentary was based on the numerical system known as dayan A I A , 
explained in the Xui appendix of the Tijing Hi!! (see 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu , 

preface 8b), which was the subject of many exegeses during the Tang and Song 
dynasties. 

The 263 Xiuzhen shishu edition of the Wuzhen pian is the most complete, since it 
includes Zhang Boduan’s Buddhist poems (cf. 144 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian 
shiyi). Although there are a few changes in the order of some of thcjueju M'S] and 
Xijiang yue Ai poems, our text follows mosdy the same numerical order as 142 
Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian sanzhu and the Wuzhen pian zhushu ( Siku quanshu H IM 
edition). 

Farzeen Baldrim-Hussein 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Azuma Juji, “Cho Hakutan Goshinhen”; Imai Usaburo, “ Goshinen ”; Liu Ts’un-yan, “Zhang 
Boduan yu Wuzhen pian”; Miyazawa Masayori, “ Dosu Goshinhen to Cho Heishuku no Go- 
shinhen ni tsuite”; Robinet, Introduction a I’alchimie interieure taoiste; Yan Zhenfei, “ Wuzhen 
pian chengshu didian.” 

Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian zhushu B A tn R li§ t£ 

8 juan 

By Zhang Boduan (984-1028); commentary by Weng Baoguang 

^ H it , zi Yuanming \ fflfy],hao Wuming zi 444 , Xiangchuan weng 

(1173); transmitted by Chen Daling Pjffiltll, hew Ziyang weng ^Pl§ ( n 74); 

edited and commented by Dai Qizong HScIS zi Tongfu H iff , hao Kongxuan zi 
Q .%4 (ca. 1337) 

141 (fasc. 61-62) 

“Commentary on Ziyang Zhenren’s Awakening to Truth.’ This edition of the 
Wuzhen pian with Weng’s commentary passed into the possession of Chen Daling, 
Weng’s contemporary, who transmitted it to his disciple Boyun zi [A S 7‘ (cf. Chen 
Daling’s preface in 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu and Boyun zi’s introduction in 143 Sancheng 
biyao 14b). 

Weng Baoguang does not say how or from whom he obtained his edition. His 
contemporary Chen, on the other hand, states in his preface that the book had been 
transmitted to Weng by Liu Yongnian glj 7% ' 4 - . This statement is in direct contradic- 
tion to what we know from elsewhere and refers to a line of transmission that had 
nothing to do with the Lu family, for whom Zhang had worked, but was attached to 




[ 818 ] 3.A.4 Neidati and Yangsheng 



3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 819 ] 



the Zhang, Liu, Weng, Chen tradition of transmission. There were many versions of 
the Wuzhen pian during the Southern Song, and several Weng commentaries were 
also in circulation. The 263.26 Wuzhen pian, for instance, gives the author of the com- 
mentary sometimes as Wuming zi ffi ^ -p and sometimes as Xiangchuan weng ^ j I [ 
^ (Weng Baoguang was a native ofXiangchuan in Sichuan). Chen Zhixu, who 
was familiar with the Xiuzhen shishu version, also gives both names in 1067 Shangyang 
zijindan dayao. Dai Qizong possessed two different versions as well (cf. 141 Wuzhen 
pian zhushu and 14s Wuzhen pian zhushi). 

Dai Qizong also claims that the Weng commentary incorporated in 141 Wuzhen 
pian zhushu is the original Wuzhen pian edition of the Lu family, later obtained by 
Weng Baoguang. The Wuzhen pianji 2b-ja (preface to 142 Wuzhen pian sanzhu) 
mentions several examples of variants in other editions, for instance, the poem “Rao- 
jun liaowu zhenru xing MU' 7 fgtR£Pf 4 ” in 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu 8.17b and us 
Wuzhen pian zhushi 2.40a. This poem was not included in the edition belonging to 
the Lu family but in a ‘ separate edition” ( bieben jjlj A ; cf. 142 Wuzhen pian sanzhu 3a). 
Since the poem can be found in all the versions of the Wuzhen pian in the Daozang 
except 146 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian jiangyi, it is possible that the original edition 
belonging to the Lu family was already lost or incomplete during the Southern Song 
dynasty (1127-1279). See see also the introduction to 3.A.4.C above. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian shiyi 

11 fols. 

By Zhang Boduan (984-1082) 

144 (fasc. 64) 

“Supplement to the Essay on Ziyang Zhenren’s [Immediate] Awakening to Truth.” 
This text is mentioned in Zhang Boduan’s preface as comprising thirty-two poems 
in praise of Buddhism (see 141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian zhushu , preface 16b). The 
present text, with the subtitle Chanzong gesong shiqu zayan is 

a collection of thirty-two poems with a short introduction at the beginning; it is 
included in 263.26 Wuzhen pian (. Xiuzhen shishu 3o.ia-i2a) under the title Chanzong 
gesong If 7 (Odes in Praise of Chan). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



Wuzhen pian zhushi tn R 

3 juan 

By Zhang Boduan (984-1082); commentary by Weng Baoguang H 

^k$t,zi Yuanming S 3 , hao Wuming zi |EJ 7 (A- 1173) 

145 (fasc. 65) 

“Explication of the Essay on [Immediate] Awakening to Truth.” This work is a 
variant version of the Weng Baoguang commentary given in 141 Ziyang zhenren 
Wuzhen pian zhushu ; it was compiled by Dai Qizong and is described by the 

latter in a postface dated 1336 (see 143 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen zhizhixiangshuosaneheng 
biyao 22b). 

The text was preceded by a short preface by Zixu zi 7 HM 7 • The latter, according 
to Dai, deleted a whole section of Weng Baoguang’s preface (see 141 Wuzhen pian 
zhushu , preface 10b). This section in our text (preface 4a) is shorter and quite different 
from the other version. The preface in the present text is also undated, whereas the 
other version is dated 1173. 

Dai Qizong also describes the work as being divided into three juan, with an intro- 
duction at the beginning of each chapter, which is the case in the present text. These 
prefaces actually constitute three essays, entitled “Sancheng biyao lun Hfw ,” 

added to the text by Zixu zi (see 143 Sancheng biyao 7b-i2b and 22b). 

Our text is referred to once as a “separate edition” ( bieben $lj $ ) in 141 Wuzhen pian 
zhushu 7.7b (compare with 2.48a). The bieben quoted in our text (2.35a), however, is 
the same as the Xue Daoguang commentary in 142 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian 
sanzhu 4.11a. 

The numerical order of die Wuzhen pian poems in the present work differs from 
that in all the other commentaries. The third chapter is devoted to a long alchemical 
poem by Zhang Boduan, entitled “Du Zhouyi cantong qiV The poems on Buddhist 
themes, however, are not included. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen zbizhi xiangshuo sancheng biyao 

33 fols., appendix 

143 (fasc. 64) 

“Explanations on Ziyang Zhenren’s Essay on the [Immediate] Awakening to 
Truth.” This text and its appendix, “Detailed Explanation of the Directives of the 
Wuzhen pian and Esoteric [Transmission of the] Essential [Methods of the] Three 
Vehicles” are presented as two separate texts in the Daozang. The appendix, errone- 
ously numbered 144 instead of 143 in the Tiwen yinshu guan H H tit index of 




[ 820 ] 3 .A. 4 Neidan and Tangsheng 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangsheng [ 821 ] 



the Daozang, should have been placed directly after the main text, as it is in the Siku 
quanshu fl| edition of the 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu and also in the edition in 

the Ming collection, Jindan zhengli daquan (in Daosbu qucmji 

Jfi). These two editions are virtually identical. 

A comparison of the present text with the Siku quanshu edition brings other 
anomalies to light. The presentation of the Wuzhen pian ffjytifS poems in the latter 
matches that in 142 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian sanzhu , except in the case of the twelve 
Xijiangyue Sd TJ poems, where the numbers are slightly different. The present text, 
however, changes the order completely. Moreover, the Siku quanshu edition, entided 
Wuzhen pian zhushu , is in three juan with a one-juan appendix: Wuzhen pian zhushu 
zhixiangshuo . Our text, however, is divided into eight juan. Moreover, the present 
work should include the Wuzhen pian ji (see preface 5a, 8a), which the 

editors of the Daozang wrongly placed at the beginning of 142 Wuzhen pian sanzhu. 
The present text has also been considerably reworked, and we find whole passages 
of 142 Wuzhen pian sanzhu interpolated into the commentaries (see, e.g., 1.10b); 
quotations from a “separate edition” ( bieben $(|$) generally refer to the latter text. 
These interpolations and most of the allusions to the separate edition are lar king in 
the Siku quanshu edition, which on the whole is more complete and reliable. Since 
most of the interpolations consist of commentaries by Chen Zhixu and Lu Shu 
HI?, it is possible that the additions were made by a member of Chen Zhixu’s 
school. Our text also includes one poem (7.21a) that is missing in all the other Daozang 
editions. 

The appendix is a collection of essays, prefaces, biographies and explanations by 
Weng Baoguang, Dai Qizong HSc^th, and other authors. The Daozang edition 
is clearly inferior to that in Siku quanshu and contains many omissions. Some of the 
materials, especially the biographies, are abridged. 

Half of the appendix (ia-i3a) comprises essays by Weng Baoguang. Of these, 
the three entitled “Sancheng biyao were added as introductions to each of 

the three juan of 14s Wuzhen pian zhushi. 

A short preface by Boyun zi E^fST', dated 1204, relates the history of the transmis- 
sion of the Weng Baoguang commentary. 

The Zhang zhenren henmo R A $ ^ is a short biography based on 142 Wuzhen 

pian sanzhu, “Wuzhen pian ji f§ iH M sE,” written shortly before 1173. The biography 
further relates a story to the effect that Zhang Boduan and two other officials were 
three stars of the Ziwei ^0 constellation. This story was told to the author of the 
Benmo by the grandson of Huang Shang ff (H (1044-1130), one of the officials, and 
was clearly meant to denigrate the latter. Since the tradition that Zhang Boduan 
was a banished star is mentioned by Bo Yuchan in his collected works (early thir- 
teenth century; see Bo Tuchan quanji [= 1 3 s® 8 ^lj| 7.20a in Daozang jinghua), the 



biography must have been written toward the end of the twelfth century or at the 
beginning of the thirteenth. 

The Xue Zixian shiji (i6b-i9a) is an account of the Buddhist Xue 

Daoguang’s meeting with his master Shi Xingling and of his subsequent 

conversion to Taoism. This account, which contains biographical material on both 
Xue Daoguang and Shi Xingling, is reproduced in LZTT 49. Th c Xue Zixian shiji 
was intended as an introduction to a commentary on the Wuzhen pian attributed to 
Xue Daoguang (18b), and as such it plays a decisive role in die dispute over the 
authorship of the Weng Baoguang commentary. 

Both the Daozang and the Siku quanshu editions of the Xue Zixian shiji are incom- 
plete, but again the latter is clearly better. According to another version of the Xue 
Zixian shiji , Xue Daoguang wrote his commentary in order to correct Ye Wenshu’s 
mistaken interpretation (cf. Sizhu Wuzhen pian, preface 3b). According to Dai Qizong 
(20a), since the Shiji and the commentary had been transcribed by Shangqiu laopu 
Jinshi Weng Yuanwang Zhenyi (?) in 1115, Xue Dao- 

guang could not have criticized Ye Wenshu, whose commentary had been written 
in 1161. The end of the Shiji , however, is wrongly appended to 142 Wuzhen pian sanzhu 
6a, where it is dated 1169 (read jichou Bfl for yichou Z,i)- Thus the possibility that 
Xue Daoguang (d. 1191) wrote a commentary cannot be excluded. The Shiji in the 
Wuzhen pian sizhu also gives the date 1169 and states that the text was transcribed by 
Shangqiu laopu twenty-eight years later (i.e., ca. 1197). 

Nonetheless, there are several points in favor of Dai Qizong’s hypothesis that the 
commentary was written by Weng Baoguang : 

1. The commentary by Xue Daoguang is not quoted in the thirteenth century, 
either by Bo Yuchan or by other followers of his school. The 1088 Huandan juming 
pian, on the other hand is mentioned often. 

2. The Wuzhen pian in 263.26 Wuzhen pian ( Xiuzhen shishu 26-30) comprises com- 
mentaries by Xiangchuan Weng j I [ H and by Wuming zi M These commen- 
taries are also quoted by Chen Zhixu in 1067 Shangyang zijindan dayao (see 142 
Wuzhen pian sanzhu). Since Xiangchuan Weng was the hao of Weng Baoguang, 
and since she Xiuzhen shishu was compiled by disciples of the Wuzhen pian school, the 
error would surely have been corrected if the commentary had actually been written 
by Xue Daoguang. 

3. Yu Yan, who was a great admirer of Zhang Boduan and Xue Daoguang, 
quotes both the Wuzhen pian and the Huandan juming pian but criticizes the com- 
mentary by Weng Baoguang (see 100s Zhouyi cantong qi fahui 1.3b; 4.3a; 9.2a; and 
14s Wuzhen pian zhushi 2.22b, 32a, 35a). 

4. Xue Daoguang met his teacher in 1120, according to his preface (see 1088 
Huandan juming pian), but the Xue Zixian shiji gives a date of 1106. The Shiji was 




[ 822 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsherig 



then transcribed in 1115 (19a), further proof of a reworking of the text at a later date. 
The Shiji is quoted in Lu Shu’s preface (cf. 142 Wuzhen pian sanzhu , preface 2b). 

Farzeen Baldnan -Hussein 

Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian sanzhu ^PlRAfulllIAIi 
5 juan 

Commentaries by Chen Zhixu RSSfcMi, zi Guanwu tgif, hew Shangyang zi ± 
(A- I 33 I ); Lu Shu M, zi Ziye TS? (fl. thirteenth century?); and Xue Shi 
MR (i.e., Xue Daoguang WMH,zi Daoyuan iiM, hao Zixian (dated 
1169) ; appendix: “Wuzhen pian ji (gigged” by Lu Sicheng Jg M . , zi Yanfo jf 

? (before 1173); edited and printed by Zhang Shihong (fl. fourteenth 

century) 

142 (fasc. 63-64) 

‘Three Commentaries on Ziyang Zhenren’s Essay on the [Immediate] Awakening 
to Truth.” The editor, Zhang Shihong, was an official during the reign of Wenzong 
(1328—1329) of the Yuan dynasty (see Yuan shi 32.719). He was therefore a contempo- 
rary of Chen Zhixu. The commentary attributed to Xue Daoguang in our text, 
however, is quoted by Chen as being by Wuming zifit^T or Xiangchuan weng % 1 1 [ 
in 1067 Shangyang zijindan dayao 5.10a. Chen’s quotations were excerpted from the 
collection included in 263.26 Wuzhen pian (Xiuzhen shishu 26—30). In his preface (4b) 
to the present text, however, Chen not only criticizes the collection but also mentions 
the commentaries by Xue Daoguang and Lu Shu, to which he later added his own 
comments (preface 5a). 

Zhang Shihong was responsible for some changes in the Wuzhen pian sanzhu com- 
piled by Chen Zhixu. He deleted all the poems that figure in 144 Ziyang zhenren 
Wuzhen pian shiyi and also a few others that he claimed were forgeries (preface 6b). 

There were many editions of the Wuzhen pian sanzhu available at the time the Dao- 
zang was compiled. Later additions to 141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian zhushu were 
excerpted from a different version; the commentary by Lu Shu in 7.21a, for example, 
is missing in the present text. 

Four of the five quotations from “a separate edition” (bieben jjfj A) in 141 Wuzhen 
pian zhushu (1.1b, 5b, 2.17a, and 6.3b) can be found in our text (1.1b, 3a, 17a, and 
4.1a). 

The Wuzhen pian sanzhu presents the poems in the order described in Zhang Bo- 
duan’s preface, with one additional Xijiangyue ji E and fi vejueju &g hj poems at 
the end. 

The “Wuzhen pian ji fgRMIS” or “Notes on the Wuzhen pian ” by Lu Sicheng, 
which was added to the present critical and annotated edition of the Wuzhen pian fg 
R H as prefatory matter, comprises a biography of Zhang Boduan and an account 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 823 ] 



of the events surrounding the transmission of the Wuzhen pian. It is mentioned by 
Weng Baoguang in his preface dated 1173 and should have been placed originally 
at the end of the latter’s commentary (cf. 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu , preface 5a and 8a). 
The version of the “Wuzhen pian ji” we have here is incomplete. It ends abrupdy on 
page 3a, followed (3b— 5b) by a passage from Chen Zhixu’s commentary (2.4a-6b). 
It ends (6a) with the last paragraph of the Xue Zixian shiji, which is dated 1169 (cf. 
143 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen zhizhi xiangshuo sancheng biyao 19a). A comparison with 
another version shows that only the last line— bearing Lu Sicheng’s name, and his 
official title, Zhaofeng lang — is missing (cf. Wuzhen pianjizhu flf H HI 

7, Daozang jinghua edition). Zhaofeng lang, a prestigious title, occurs only after the 
Shaoxing era, that is, after 1161 ( Song shi 168.4012); hence the “Wuzhen pian ji” must 
have been written after this date, along with Weng Baoguang’s preface. The work 
was known to Bo Yuchan (early thirteenth century), according to Dai Qizong f|Scf£B 
Sh ( 141 Wuzhen pian zhushu , preface 5a). In the early Yuan, the “Wuzhen pian ji” was 
often quoted (cf. ioosZhouyi cantong qifahui 6.25a and 9.5b), and the LZTT 49 refers 
to it as “another source” ( yiyun — 5 ) for Zhang Boduan’s biography. 

Although the “Wuzhen pian ji” is one of the main sources for the history of the 
work’s textual transmission, it contains a number of errors with respect to the native 
places of some of the persons mentioned in the work. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Robinet, Introduction a I’alchimie interieure. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pianjiangyi f&tPHlJI A t§ 01111831 

7 juan 

By Zhang Boduan ’fik{&%tii,zi Pingshu ^^i^ao Ziyang (984-1082); 

commentary by Xia Yuanding JI 7C fftf ,zi Zongyu 5k H , hao Yunfeng sanren f| 

Kf A (ca. 1226) 

146 (fasc. 66) 

“Ziyang Zhenren’s Essay on the [Immediate] Awakening to Truth Explained.” 
Three prefaces by Xia Yuanding’s friends, all scholar-officials, precede the text. The 
earliest of these, by Zhen Dexiu (1178-1235), is dated 1227. The commentary 

was, however, written earlier, since it is mentioned in a postface dated 1226 (see 109 
Huangdi yinfu jing jiangyi, 4.11b, “Jindan sanshu referring to the present 

work and two other commentaries by the same author). According to his own ac- 
count, written in 1224, Xia Yuanding was initiated on Longhu shan f|/^|I| (Jiangxi) 
in 1220 ( Nanyueyushi benmo 16a). The commentary was therefore written between this 
date and 1226. 



[ 824 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 82s ] 



Xia Yuanding’s interpretation of the Wuzhen pian RH is based principally on 
the Zhong-Lii texts (see especially 2.9b). Among these, 246 Xishan qunxian huizhen 
ji and 263.14 Zhong-Lii chuandaoji (Xiuzhen shishu 14-16) are frequently quoted. The 
author also quotes (1.5b) a verse from 1088 Huandan fuming pian (ia) by Xue Dao- 
guang, but unfortunately none of the extant Wuzhen pian commentaries are men- 
tioned. Most of the quotations are from poems attributed to Zhongli Quan or to 
Lu Dong bin; Xia Yuanding is known to have compiled a collection of the latter’s 
verse entitled Jindan shijue in two juan (q.v.). 

The Xia commentary comprises only sixteen poems in regulated verse ( liishi ), 
the sixty-four/we/w M'S}, one liishi in five-character lines, and twelve Xijiang yue 

lyric poems. All the poems on Buddhist themes are missing. A comparison with the 
Xiuzhen shishu version also shows that the order of the sixteen liishi is totally different; 
however, except for a few jueju there are no other changes in presentation. Accord- 
ing to the Yuan author Fang Hui /j ® (1227-1306), Xia Yuanding not only practiced 
heterodox methods but also fabricated the twelve Xijiang yue, wrongly attributed to 
Zhang Boduan (see Tongjiang xuji 31.17a). The latter accusation, however, does 
not hold up, since the twelve poems in question are mentioned in Zhang Boduan’s 
preface and figure in all editions of the Wuzhen pian. 

Farzeen Baldnan-Hussein 

Hunyuan bajing zhenjing M/C/Yfl iRM 

5 juan 

First half of the twelfth century? 

660 (fasc. 344) 

“Book of the Eight Effulgences of the Origin of Chaos.” This is an undated treatise 
on Inner Alchemy. Zeng Zao gives an abstract of the present book in 1017 Daoshu 
17, “Hunyuan pian MftWi which covers the complete text as it appears here. A com- 
mentary on 3.1a confirms its present division into five juan, but the original version 
must have had three. On 2.5b there is a reference to a middle juan, while on 1.10b there 
is a mention of a third and final juan. As these references are to passages on 3.2a and 
5.nb-i2a, respectively, we may suppose that the first three juan of the present verion, 
written as a dialogue, correspond to the original first two juan, while the present juan 
4 and 5, which contain more practical instructions, are the original final juan. How- 
ever, the text seems to have been divided from the beginning into five chapters (pian 
M ), as we find on 4.1a a reference to a fifth pian that discusses the establishment of an 
altar ( litan ii®); this reference corresponds, indeed, to a section beginning on 5.8b 
in the present edition. 

The main characteristic of the contents of the present book is its relationship to 
the Wuzhen pian f§ (HH, in vocabulary as well as in argument. For instance, the 



discussion on 3-sb-7b on the Three and the Five (sanwu .=.£) and the conception 
of the Infant is cognate to poem 14 of the sixteen seven-word poems in the Wuzhen 
pian (see 263.26 Wuzhen pian [Xiuzhen shishu 26.29a-3oa]), while the passage on the 
White Tiger’s First Menses on 4.14b is related to number 3 of the Xijiang yue [5 
irregular poems (263.26 Wuzhen pian [. Xiuzhen shishu 29-4b-5a]). The book 
contains also numerous references to the ritual framework of the neidan practices it 
describes (see 1.3b; 5.2b; 5 .i3b-i4a). These descriptions do not allow us, however, to 
establish a relationship between the present book and the liturgical practices of die 
so-called Hunyuan ritual that existed in Song (960-1279) times (see 1220 Daofa 
huiyuan). 

The entire book is written in a vernacular style with many colloquialisms (e.g., 5.4b. 

The available evidence therefore points to the first half of the twelfth century as the 
period in which the present book must have been written. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Huanyuan pian §j iKi H 

10 fols. 

By Shi Tai £^t,zi Dezhi hao Xinglin Cuixuan zi (d. 1158) 

1091 (fasc. 742) 

“Book on Returning to the Origin.” This book is a collection of eighty-one al- 
chemical poems in seven-word verse. The poems were written a year after Shi Tai s 
encounter with Zhang Boduan (see the preface). This meeting is described in de- 
tail in the “Xue Zixian shiji $ £ K * B a biography relating Shi Tai’s transmission 
of his teaching to his disciple Xue Daoguang (143 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen zhizhi 
xiangshuo sancheng biyao 6 b; cf. also Shi Tai’s and Xue Daoguang’s biographies 

in LZTT 49 )- 

Shi Tai’s poems and preface are included in 263.1 Zazhu zhixuan pian (Xiuzhen 
shishu 2). The latter work, moreover, contains a postface (7.9b-iob) by Shi Tai that 
is missing in the text under discussion. This postface, however, is appended to Xue 
Daoguang’s “Dansui ge ftM” and discusses the essential ideas of the poem. It 

is therefore possible that it was not originally a postface to the Huanyuan pian. 

Farzeen Baldnan-Hussein 




[ 826 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangsheng 

Huandan fuming pian H ft f! n|j H 

13 fols. 

By Xue Daoguang A, alias Shi j£,zt Daoyuan iMi®, hao Zixiaii , 

Biling chanshi ® ; preface dated 1126 

1088 (fasc. 742) 

“Book of the Return to Life and the Cyclically Transformed Elixir.” This is a col- 
lection of alchemical poems by Xue Daoguang, the third patriarch in the Wuzhen 
pian lineage. According to the preface, Xue Daoguang received an oral instruction 
(. koujue P|£) from a master in 1120 (?), but his biography in the LZTT 49 and the 
“Xue Zixian shiji §? If Hi M ” ( 143 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen zhizhi xiangshuo sancheng 
biyao 17a) states that he met S H 1 Tai , author of 1091 Huanyuan pian and direct disciple 
of Zhang Boduan, in 1106. 

The present tide is listed in the Zhizhai shulujieti 12.349, which also mentions the 
preface (dated 1126). This tide actually refers to the poems in the first half of the text 
(ia-8a), according to the description of the work in the preface. The “Dansui ge fjM 
(8b-nb) was appended by a compiler at a later date. The latter also figures in 263.1 
Zazhu zhixuan pian (Xiuzhen shishu 4b-9b). 

The present text included a commentary in Yuan (1279-1368) times (see Xishang 
jutan 2.6b); this commentary is no longer extant. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Cuixu pian 

28 fols. 

By Chen Nan Nanmu A, hao Cuixu weng W - Niwan 

xiansheng (d. 1213); compiled by Wang Sicheng ISIS, zi Zhenxi zi 

RSA (A- 1217) 

1090 (fasc. 742) 

“Book of Azure-Emptiness.” This collection is attributed to Chen Nan, one of 
the patriarchs in the Wuzhen pian fff (ft H lineage and a disciple of Xue Daoguang 
(see his biography in LZTT 49 and 1088 Huandan fuming pian). For a printing of this 
work before 1250, see the article on 1072 Jindan zhizhi. Chen also obtained a book on 
Thunder magic, the Jingxiao dalei lang shu M If A H f $ it* , at Limu shan 
(see LZTT 49.15a and the biographical note in 1220 Daofa huiyuan io8.i5b-i6b). Both 
Chen Nan and his disciple Bo Yuchan were linked to Thunder rites (see van der 
Loon, “A Taoist collection” 402). According to Yu Yan (fl. 1284), the entire Cuixu 
pian had been fabricated by the prolific Bo ( Xishang futan 2.2b). The LZTT 49, how- 
ever, mentions a collection entitled Cuixu miaowu quanji by Chen 

Nan. 

The Daozang edition of the Cuixu pian comprises a preface by Wang Sicheng, 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangsheng [ 827 ] 

seven poems, and a short alchemical treatise. The Daozang jiyao (“Kui H” 4127) has 
a better edition, since it omits the second poem, entitled “Dadao ge A iM fA” which 
is an interpolation (see 238 Yuanyang zijinyiji ia flf). The Daozang jiyao also includes 
a colophon by Chen Yuxing dated I2I 7 (cf- Bo Haiqiong quanji 0 !^ ft AIK 

6.34a, 133). The colophon, entitled Ba Chen Niwan zhenren cuixu pian j-jt M & R A 
WfO-Wi, States that the first poem in our text, the “Ziting jing (ia), had been 

noted down by Pan Jingliang (Sit A and that Wang Sicheng not only compiled the 
Cuixu pian but also supplemented it. 

The 263 Xiuzhen shishu includes some poems from the present text but wrongly 
attributes a Cuixu pian to Niwan xiansheng Chen Pu (cf. 263.12 Za- 

zhu jiejing [Xiuzhen shishu ia], 1096 Chen xiansheng neidan jue, and 1072 Jindan zhizhi, 
preface). 

The “Luofou cuixu yin” (7b), a poem dedicated to Bo Yuchan in 1212, is included 
in 1307 Haiqiong Bo zhenren yulu 4.1a ff. (ca. 1221). The collection also includes three ci- 
lyrics (i5b-i6a) in honor of Chen’s three main disciples: Sha Daozhao Ju Jiusi 

$$ AS, and Bo Yuchan. Finally, the “Jindan shijue is a set of eighty-one 

alchemical poems in seven-word verses. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

van der Loon, “A Taoist collection” 401-5. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Jindan zhizhi A It D5 Jit 

13 fols. 

By Zhou Wusuozhu |n] ft ; preface dated 1250 

1072 (fasc. 739) 

“Straightforward Instructions for [Inner] Alchemy.” The author, a native of Yong- 
jia zkH (modern Wenzhou) who uses the surname Wusuozhu (Homeless), 

states in his preface that in the course of his search for the Tao since an early age, he met 
a certain Lin Ziran M of Mount Chicheng in the year 1242. Lin instructed 
him in alchemy and introduced him to his master Li zhenren A- Thereupon, 
the author visited many Taoist training centers ( conglin HM^), until in 1249 he met a 
certain Fang Bixu jjWlM. of the Zongyang %% [temple], who was known as an au- 
thentic transmitter of the tradition of the Wuzhen pian In yfl M ■ Having shown Fang 
the text of the present work, Zhou obtained his friendship. Later he discussed his ideas 
with the Buddhist monk Yuancan MM from Putian MB and others, who assured 
him that his ideas were in agreement with Chan teachings and with the works of the 
Nanzong patriarchs Zhang Boduan and Chen Nan. The author, together with 
a fellow Taoist named Wu ^ from the Boyun an E-j IS ill in Zhupu , printed the 



[ 8i8 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangsheng 



Jindan xujfcftff of Zhang zhenren 3 § j| A and the logo Cuixu pian of N iwan Chen 
zhenren $2 ftBfc SR A (q.v.). 

The work consists of sixteen poems on Inner Alchemy and a treatise on the same 
subject, which also discusses the unity of the Three Teachings. 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Jindan sibai zi ^ 0 {If ^ 

12 fols. 

Attributed to Zhang Boduan (984-1082); commentary by Huang 

Ziru MS®, dated 1241 

1081 (fasc. 741) 

‘The Elixir Explained in Four Hundred Words.” This text comprises twenty poems 
(in five-word verses) and a long preface (ia-ja), both ascribed to Zhang Boduan, 
zi Pingshu. According to the preface, this poem was transmitted to Ma Ziran. Bo 
Yuchan, in a letter addressed to Zhang Boduan, alludes to this work but does 
not mention the present tide (see 263 Xiuzben shishu 6.4b, “Xie Zhang Ziyang shu”). 

Bo claims to have come across the text in the Wuyi Mountains. In his colo- 
phon dated 1241, Huang Ziru from Xujiang Bf 31 (Jiangxi) seems convinced that the 
work was written by Zhang, but the Yuan (1279-1368) author Yu Yan claims that 
the entire text had been fabricated by the prolific Bo Yuchan, because the earliest 
edition of this work had appeared in a collection entitled Qunxian zhuyuji f[ij 
3 £ JH (fisted in the Zhizhai shulujieti 12.353), a compendium of Taoist works collected 
or written by Bo Yuchan himself (Xishang futan 2.8a). A later tradition claims that 
the work was revealed to Bo by Zhang Boduan (cf. 1067 Shangyang zi jindan dayao 
7.6b). The Huang Ziru version, which is also the earliest edition of this work, is repro- 
duced in 263 Xiuzben shisbu 5, but without Huang’s colophon and with the addition 
of five poems by Huang. There are many editions of this popular work extant; the 
most important of these can be found in the Dcwyan neiwai quanshu collected by Peng 
Haogu (1597), in the Fanghu waishi by Lu Xixing (1520-1606), and in Li Wenshu’s 
Jindan sibai zijie (1061). 

The text describes the Inner Alchemical process based on the theory discussed in 
1191 Bicbuan Zhengyang zbenren lingbao bifa. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Wang Mu, Wuzhen pian jianjie. 



Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangsheng [ 829 ] 



Yuqingjinsi qingbua biwen jinbao neilian danjue 



3 juan 

By Zhang Boduan Pingshu A®, boo Ziyang % PH (984M082) 

240 (fasc. 114) 

“Alchemical Formula for the Inner Purification of the Gold Treasure; Secret Writ- 
ings from the Golden Box of the Jade Purity [Heaven], Transmitted by the Immortal 
Qinghua.” Although this neidan A J 3 treatise is ascribed to Zhang Boduan, it was 
collected and recorded by a disciple (2.5a). 

The disciple is identified as Wang Bangshu in an introduction to the text 

in the Daoyan neiwai quanshu (collected by Peng Haogu; preface 1597)- This introduc- 
tion, which is missing in the Daozang edition, states (a) that the text was revealed to 
Zhang Boduan by Qinghua zhenren itf lj§ jH A, and (b) that it was transmitted to 
Wang Bangshu by Zhang Boduan on Luofu shan MffilU- 

The treatise is not fisted in any of the bibliographies. Bo Yuchan mentions a 
Tuqing lingpian ®H, but it is evident from the context that he is referring to 
the Wuzhen pian RH (cf. 263.1 Zazhu zhixuan pian [Xiuzben shishu 4-8b]). The 

divinity Qinghua dijun Wijl'riflt played an important 




role in the Shenxiao order during Song Huizong’s reign 
(1100-1125), but the text (1.8b) quotes the Ruyao jing 
A^$t, a poem popular during the Southern Song 
(1127-1279; cf. 13s Cui gong ruyao jing zhujie). More- 
over, Zhang Boduan is referred to as Zhang zi 3 H 
-?■, an appellation used for the philosopher Zhang 
Zai ? 5 i!c (1020-1076) during the Song (cf. Zhang 
Zaiji 307, 373). The use of Zhang Zai’s philo- 

sophical terms, such as qizhi zhi xing A. 1 ' 4 , is 
further evidence of the author’s intention of finking 
this spurious work with the name of a leading Song 
philosopher. 

The text explains inner alchemical theory using pseu- 
do-philosophical terminology (fig. 21.) Part of the work 
is presented as a dialogue between Zhang Boduan 
and a disciple, the rest as discourses on various neidan 
AJ’f topics. The main emphasis is on “circulation of 
the inner fight.” 



figure 21. Allegory of the 
sublimation of yin energy in 
Inner Alchemy ( 240 2.13a) 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Wang Mu, Wuzhen pian jianjie. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



[ 8so ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 831 ] 



Shangqing Taixuan jiuyang tu 
12 fols. 

By Hou Shanyuan ft ${f , hao Taixuan zi X 
-p ; end of the twelfth century 
154 (fasc. 68) 

“Shangqing Illustrations of Yang-Nine by [Master] 
Taixuan.” Hou Shanyuan was a Taoist from the Shenju 
dong on Mount Guye fcijIH' ill in Shanxi. His 

hao was Taixuan zi, hence the tide. Hou was a contem- 
porary of Mao Hui 35 fH who was received at the im- 
perial court in 1190 (see 7SS Taishang laojun shuo chang 
qingjingjing zhu and 973 Ganshui xianyuan lu 7.6b) 
This book contains diagrams accompanied by 
(mosdy versified) commentaries on the xiuzhen ff^ 
[J| . The illustrations of the nine fundamental phases 
of alchemical transmutation are followed by drawings 
with commentary concerning fire-phasing and, finally, 
by twelve songs on the twelve alchemical periods (see 
fig. 22). 

The present work shows a strong influence of Chan 
Buddhism and situates itself in the tradition of the Wuzhen plan fn RH, which is 
quoted on page 2a. It also quotes the Jinbijing (page 6b). 

Catherine Despeux 

Tuanqing zi zhiming pian ;§ Jlf -f M rip i§ 

2 juan 

By Wang Qingsheng iiJUfK hao Yuanqing zi ft'/jf ~P; I2 49 

1089 (fasc. 742) 

“Master Yuanqing’s Book of the Supreme Life Force.” In his preface, dated 1249, 
Wang Qingsheng defines this life force as the culmination of xing 14 and ming rip 
resulting from the true realization of one’s innate nature. The author’s teacher was a 
disciple of Bo Yuchan (cf. 27s Sanji zhiming quanti 11a), whence his use of diagrams 
and poems to elucidate his system, a method current during the thirteenth century in 
the so-called Southern school of Taoism. 

The first juan comprises poems and five diagrams describing the Inner Alchemical 
process. Wang Qingsheng’s explanations are mostly based on the Wuzhen pian f§ 
M, which is quoted frequently. 

The second juan includes a series of jueju fg'6] poems in seven-character verse, 
entitled “Rudao shi AMIEf” (Upon Entering the Tao), as well as a commentary on a 



famous «- lyric attributed to Lu Dongbin: the “Qinyuan chun IT UH # ” (cf. 136 Lit 
Chunyang zhenren Qinyuan chun danci zhujie). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Sanji zhiming quanti H S? M rip ^ 

By Wang Qingsheng EES? iff", zi Guozhai , hao Yuanqing zi Hiif A; after 

1244 

275 (fasc. 133) 

“The Three Ultimates and the Supreme Destiny Ensnared.” The author wrote this 
work after 1244, the last date mentioned in the text. He was the disciple of Master 
Yao whose hao was Taoyuan zi himself a follower of Bo Yuchan. A 

certain Yang Caiyin HIS IS instructed Wang in the principles of alchemy in 1243 and 
of fire-phasing in 1244 (11b). Wang thus belonged to the Southern school of alchemy. 
He gives a fist of the works written by the patriarchs of this lineage and transmitted 
to their successors (ioa-i2a). 

Following a number of diagrams, with commentary, on Inner Alchemy— including 
those of the Three Ultimates: Wuji MM, Taiji AM, and Huangji JjlM— the author 
discusses the meaning of the Five Chariots ( wuju H $ ) of, successively, the sheep, the 
deer, the buffalo, the great buffalo, and the great white buffalo. Wang also discusses 
the Three Vehicles ( sansheng H?H), and there is a commentary on a poem of Outer 
Alchemy ( waidan fl-) by Bo Yuchan (“Ziqing Bo zhenren jinyi dahuan waidan 

jue ‘MyM 0 31 i2a-23b), as well as a versified explanation on a 

song by Lu Dongbin (“Chunyang zhenren shuangtian xiaojiao 

2ib-23a). These two texts cannot be found in the works of their respective authors 
in the Daozang. The final part of the present work contains short prose and poetic texts 
by the author. 

Catherine Despeux 

Pomi zhengdao ge ® ^ IE iS DC 

6 fols. 

Attributed to Zhongli Quan HUMS, hao Zhengyang zhenren lEH M A; 

mid-eleventh century 

270 (fasc. 133) 

“Song for Dispelling Doubts Concerning the Correct Path.” This short Inner Al- 
chemical poem is attributed to Zhongli Quan. The date of the poem is difficult 
to ascertain, since it is nowhere quoted in its present form. One of the earliest works 
to mention a Pomi gelun by Zhongli Quan is 275 Sanji zhiming quanti 

15b (ca. 1250). But in the absence of a quotation, it is impossible to know whether 
the title refers to our poem. Later, during the Yuan dynasty (1279-1368), a different 




figure 22. The being of light 
rising from its mortal body 
(rS4 10a) 



[ ij2 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 833 ] 



poem is quoted under the same title (Zhengyang weng Zhimi ge cf. 

1067 Shangyang zijindan dayao 9.6a), suggesting that there were several poems with 
the same title in circulation. There existed, nevertheless, several versions of the poem 
during the Yuan (cf. ib of the present text and 281 Baoyi zi sanfeng laoren danjue nb). 
For example, 139 Taishang dongzhen ningshen xiuxing jingjue not only is a reduced ver- 
sion but comprises variants that clearly point to another edition. 

The poem, in seven-character verses, seems to have been modeled on another poem 
attributed to Zhongli Quan that was very much in vogue during the twelfth cen- 
tury. Nonetheless, the present poem does not accept many of the ideas presented in 
the latter (cf. ia and 263.26 Wuzhen pian [Xiuzhen shishu 28.5b]). 

The vocabulary and terms employed are based on the Wuzhen pian Iff JIM, in a 
style resembling that of Chen Niwan (cf. 1090 Cuixupian). Moreover, the basic ideas 
show a marked influence of Chan Buddhism. On the other hand, the poem criticizes 
popular neidan techniques described in other texts attributed to Zhongli 
Quan and Lii Dongbin, suggesting that the author of the poem was affiliated 
with the Wuzhen pian group. The alchemical process described in the text is accom- 
plished spontaneously upon the discovery and circulation of the qi of Former Heaven 
( xiantian zhi qi 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Taishang dongzhen ningshen xiuxing jingjue L )[B] R W f f Ife 

4 fols. 

Late Song (960-1279) or early Yuan (1279-1368) 

139 (fasc. 60) 

“Instructions from the Book of Practicing Concentration of the Spirit in the Canon 
of the Cavern of [Penetrating] Truth of the Most High.” This poem in seven-word 
verses is an abridged version of 270 Pomi zhengdaoge, attributed to Zhongli Quan. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Jinyi huandan yinzheng tu ^ ® Ff E|1 M |B| 

23 fols. 

By Longmei zi fl/UT'; ca. 1222 

151 (fasc. 68) 

“Illustrations of the Return of the Liquified Gold to the Cinnabar Field.” This 
work is a collection of drawings with accompanying poems by Longmei zi, whose real 
name, like those of many other authors of the Wuzhen pian fn R II tradition (e.g., 
Wuming zi iff ^ i L , mentioned on 19b), is unknown. 

There is a preface by Longmei zi dated 1218, but the colophon at the end (i7b-i8b) 
was written later, in approximately 1222 (gengzi T is an error for gengchen ^M). 



Another colophon by Wang Jing- 
xuan If S,a Taoist belonging to 
the lineage of Bo Yuchan, main- 
tains that Bo drew the pictures, but 
that the poems are by Longmei zi. 
Since Wang refers to Longmei zi as 
patriarch (zushi ), it is possible 
that he was the latter’s disciple. 

The question of the transmission 
of the present text is linked to the 
problems surrounding the com- 
mentary on the Wuzhen pian (on 
this question, see 141 Ziyang zhen- 
ren Wuzhen pian zhushu), which 
is sometimes attributed to Wu- 
ming zi (Weng Baoguang) and 
sometimes to Xue Daoguang. 
According to the colophon, Long- 
mei zi belonged to Wuming zi’s 
tradition (see also 141 Wuzhen pian 
zhushu, 142 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen 
pian sanzhu, 143 Ziyang zhenren 
Wuzhen zhizhi xiangshuo sancheng 
biyao, 144 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen 
bian shiyi, 14s Wuzhen pian zhushi, 
146 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian 
jiangyi, and the introduction to part 
3.A.4.C). 

During the Yuan period (1279- 
1368), the work already had its pres- 
ent form (see colophon by Ling Jing 
; i8b-2oa). 

Longmei zi uses the same termi- 
nology as Wuming zi in the latter’s 
Wuzhen pian commentary. He divides the illustrations into two groups of nine draw- 
ings (cf. the preface). The first group represents the beginning of the alchemical experi- 
ment as a circle corresponding to Taiji , the One Qi (yiqi — fa) that underlies 
all change of the expanding universe and that after numerous transformations ends 
in the formation of the elixir. The second group shows the stages that lead from the 




figure 23. Heaven and Earth, to be visualized in 
the first stage of the inner recreation of the universe 
(is i 2b) 




figure 24. Yin and yang, with the vessels of 
reproduction (isi 3a-b) 




[ 834 ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 83 s ] 




figure 25. Maintaining the immortal principle 
(isj ijb-i4a) 



absorption of the elixir to the attain- 
ment of immortality, also represented 
by a circle (see figs. 23-25). 

Each drawing is accompanied by a 
poem in seven-word verse, giving the 
tide and various explanations. 

The present text is also reproduced 
in the Ming collections Daoyan neiwai 
bijue quanshu and Fanghu waishi. In 
the Daozang jiyao edition, the text is 
accompanied by a long commentary 
by Hanchan zi [iHJJl'p. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Little, Taoism and the arts of China , 
344-47- 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



Mingdao pian 

17 fols. 

By Wang Weiyi iff—, hao Jingyang zi flfllT 1 ; 1304 

273 (fasc. 133) 

“Pages to Clarify the Tao.” This is a collection of eighty-one didactic poems on 
Inner Alchemy, written with the aim of explaining the arcana of the art to literati. 
Wang Weiyi was a scholar turned daoshi from Songjiang (Jiangsu); he died in 
1326. The number of poems is, of course, symbolic, and so are the numbers of sixteen 
seven-word full poems, sixty-four five-word cut-verse poems, one five-word regular 
verse poem, and twelve irregular verse poems to the tune of Xijiang yue • 

In addition to these lyrics, the present work includes a discussion on the artificial 
subtleties of Inner Alchemy texts (i2b-i5b) and a Song on Obtaining the Tao (15b- 
17a). Although the preface may seem to contain an allusion to the Quanzhen 
school, Wang’s work belongs entirely to the Southern tradition of Zhang Zxyang 
and Bo Yuchan. 

Kristofer Schipper 



Danjingjilun 

11 fols. 

Southern Song (1127-1279)? 

235 (fasc. 113) 

“Ultimate Treatise on Alchemical Scriptures.” This is an anonymous work writ- 
ten after the twelfth century, as the quotation of the patriarch ( zushi £i§|) on page 
2b is in fact extracted from the commentary on the Wuzhen pian fff |J| by Weng 
Baoguang (see 263.26 Wuzhen pian [Xiuzhen shishu 29.2b]). In the latter work, this 
passage is attributed to Peng Xiao; in fart, only the first sentence is by this master 
(see 1002 Zhouyi cantong qifenzhang tongzhenyi 2.30a). 

The present treatise reiterates Weng Baoguang’s discussions on Internal and 
External Medicine (neiyao and waiyao H) and on fire-phasing. The system of 
fire-phasing is here applied to the respiration techniques of holding one’s breath (biqi 
f^Jijfi,) and Embryonic Breathing (taixi fn,l)- The most original section of the work 
is that on the method for externalizing the spirits of the body through visualization 
( chushenfa Jti ; 9a-ioa). 

The poems at the end of the work are said to be lost parts of the Wuzhen pian and 
the Huandan fuming pian Mff'MnvWi- The last poem, “Wuyan HU,” on page nb, 
does figure in 1088 Huandan fuming pian ib. 



Jinyi dadan koujue ^ ® fl- P 

11 fols. 

By Zheng Dean hao Chongxu miaojing Ningzhen zi 

280 (fasc. 134) 

“Oral Formula on the Great Elixir of Liquified Gold.” According to a note after the 
title, this text was transmitted (or revealed) by a “Taoist clad in white.” The preface is 
said to be by Zheng Dean, who is also the editor (2a). 

The text itself could be of the thirteenth century or somewhat later, since it quotes 
Zhang Boduan (here called zushi tfi, “patriarch”), and also half of a verse from 
1088 Huandan fuming pian byXuE Daoguang. 

In the same vein as Zhang Boduan, Zheng Dean deals in his preface with the 
differences and similarities between Buddhists and Taoists and with the problems and 
dangers of transmission to an unsuitable person (cf. Zhang’s preface to the Wuzhen 
pian f§RM). Th cjue §£ that follows (3a~3b) describes the entire Inner Alchemical 
process. The rest of the text comprises alchemical poems (of which six are in ci M 
style), a short treatise on the mind (xin U ) and the Tao, and a further alchemical 
poem. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 




[ 836 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangsheng 



3 .A .4 'Neidan and Tangsheng [ 837 ] 



Bixu zi qinchuan zhizhi H J® Jp IS f# pH Ifi 

11 fols. 

Attributed to Yang Mingzhen EIJ| , hew Bixu zi (1150-1228) 

241 (fasc. 114) 

“Instructions Personally Transmitted by Master Bixu.” This is a short treatise on 
Inner Alchemy, presumably by the Quanzhen ^ Jt patriarch Yang Mingzhen, whose 
hew was Bixu zi and who was an expert in neidan (X J 3 (see pss Zhongnan shan zhuting 
xianzhen neizhuan 2.2b-3b). The introduction states that late in life the writer met 
Master Haiqiong — that is, Bo Yuchan— and also a hermit called Anran 

jushi M Hi i: at the Zhuling cavern-heaven It M ^ , that is, Mount Heng f|j ill . 
Although Yang’s biography does not mention that he traveled to southern China, the 
meetings are chronologically not impossible. In any case, the present work cannot be 
by Chen J ingyuan, who also used the hew Bixu zi (as affirmed by Boltz, A survey of 
Taoist literature , 327 n. 569). The neidan methods described here are generally those of 
the Southern school (Nanzong j^pr?), with special reference to the Wuzhen pian ffj 

«js. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Chen Xubo guizhong zhinan (St Zffi d ^ Jti l$j 

2 juan 

By Chen Chongsu Pit ^ , hew Xubo zi Im&f", Yuan (1279-1368) 

243 (fasc. 114) 

“True Central Directions by Master Chen Xubo.” This is a treatise on Inner Al- 
chemy characteristically blending elements from the Nanzong Wi'M tradition with 
that of the Quanzhen ^ Lp| school. The author, in his undated postface ( houxu ), 
identifies himself as Chen Chongsu, Zhenfang daoren A. of the Shengzhen 

xuanhua dongtian # (}t jXJfcPJX: of the Wuyi 3 £^||i| Mountains. He must have 
been a contemporary of the Yuan scholar Wu Cheng (1249-1333), as the latter wrote 
three poems in dedication of another work by Chen, the Neidan xianmi (see 

Wu Wenzhengji 92.29b-3oa). In the preface to these poems, Wu states that Chen, a 
daoshi of the Wuyi Mountains, bestowed his instructions to Yang Qingyuan Hlftf ill, 
his disciple and “student of the Can[tong qi\V 

The expression guizhong in the tide is borrowed from the Zhouyi cantong qi ID J| 
and means “correctly focused center” (see 2.3a). 

Among the authorities quoted, we find predominantly writings from the Nanzong 
tradition, but Quanzhen masters such as Dan Chuduan MlMttti and Li Jianyi $ ^ Jpj 
(hew Yuqi zi 3 E?mp) are also mentioned. 

Kristofer Schipper 



Yuqi zi danjing zhiyao cE -p J3 til H 

3 juan 

By Li Jianyi hew Yuqi zi 3 £$§~p (A- 1264) 

245 (fasc. 115) 

“Alchemical Texts: Basic Directions.” This is a collection of writings on Inner Al- 
chemy by a Quanzhen ^ (jit Taoist. Li Jianyi, a native of Yichun ]=[ # , was the grand- 
son of Li Guan $!§ (hao Yuqi sou an official with a penchant for Taoism 

(preface ia-ib). The collection comprises Li Jianyi’s works, all written during different 
periods: the preface dated 1264, for example, refers only to the first five of the titles in 
this collection (preface 2b). There are two other prefaces in the collection, one undated 
(3_7a-8a), the other dated 1266 (3.nb-i6b). 

According to Yu Yan (1258-1314), a collection of Li Jianyi’s writings was published 
in Changsha (Hunan) at about the same time as Emperor Kublai ordered the burning 
of Taoist books (1281). Yu Yan also mentions a “recent” reedition of the collection 
printed in Jiangxi. The latter, published together by Peng Shi and Po Jianming #pj 
, comprised four texts by Li Jianyi and several others by Peng Shi himself. Of the 
four— entitled “Wuzhen zhiyao Iff jUfttH ,” “Xihuang zuoyong HjUflffl “Guishi 
tu M+H,” and “Xinyin jing jie 'L'ERIM)!?”— only the first three texts are included in 
the present work (d.Xishang fietan 2. na). 

The present collection was printed by Wang Gui in 1354. It was entitled “The 
Ten Books” (shishu -pH) because it included nine works by Li Jianyi and one by his 
contemporary Peng Chongyang (see Wang’s note, 3.i8a-i9a). The collection 

includes a preface by Li Jianyi (dated 1264) and a supplement on the main lines of 
transmission from Taoist masters of the Song Dynasty and their disciples. The texts 
areas follows: 

Juan 1.(1) “Wuzhen pian zhiyao fn fit H H ,” an explanation of the system of the 
famous Inner Alchemical work, the Wuzhen pian ‘fff R H , with Li’s own interpreta- 
tion. 

Juan 2. (2) “Changsheng jiushi zhi shu J| X, IS ” (ia-8a), a commentary on 
an alchemical interpretation of the Yinfujing Hljvf 11 by Yang gu M'S- (3) “Bianhuo 
luMH” (8a-i2b), a short treatise demonstrating that the methods employed in In- 
ner Alchemy are not inferior to those of Chan Buddhism. (4-5) “Danfang fayu PJ M 
if Ip ” and “Xihuang zuoyong H (i2b-i6b), two essays on the methods and 

aims of neidan : the basis of all practice lies, according to Li Jianyi, in mental concentra- 
tion. A part of the “Danfang fayu” is included in S 79 Tangsheng hilu under the heading 
“Danfang yulu pj pit,” which comprises an additional oral instruction (koujue P 
i&) missing in our text. 

Juan 3.(6) “Zhang Ziyang zeng Bolong dong daoren ge KJ§ If & f | MM Asffc” 



l 




[ 838 ] 3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 839 ] 



(ia-6b), a commentary to a poem by Zhang Boduan. (7) “Guichong tu 4 - 1 B ” 
(7a-na); the text is preceded by an undated preface, but a summary included in S79 
Yangsheng bilu 2a, with the tide “Yuqi zi Yichun xinjue bears the 

date 1269 (the name of the author is mistakenly written Li Gongming The 

text, which begins with a diagram, deals with methods of meditation and circulation 
of qi. (8) “Jie Chunyang zhenren Qinyuan chun Al't'S#” (nb-i6b), a 

commentary on a famous a-lyric attributed to Lu Dongbin (cf. 136 Lit Chunyang 
zhenren Qinyuan chun danci zhujie). The preface is dated 1266 (11b). (9) “Miyu shi 
Ip ” (i6b-i7a), comprises five poems, probably by Peng Shi fjjj (cf. Xishang futan 
2.11a). (10) “Zan Chunyang xiang Iff # 1 ^ 0 ” (i7b-i9a), a short text commemorating 
a statue of Lu Dongbin by Peng Chongyang HJMWs, followed by a note by Wang 
Gui, dated 1352 and written on the occasion of the printing of the present collection. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Changsheng zhiyao pian MIL f 0 1 ? H 

19 fols. 

By Lin Ziran ^ , hao Huiyang zi [II PH f ; 1250 

1099 (fasc. 743) 

“Essays on the Essentials [of the Search for] Long Life.” These essays were com- 
posed by Lin Ziran, who for a long time had tried in vain to obtain the Gold-Elixir, 
that is, the success of the meditative and respiratory means of self-cultivation. In 
Fujian, Lin Ziran had met with an otherwise unknown zhenren, Mr. Lu A, 

who hailed from Sichuan. Mr. Lu instructed Lin Ziran in the art of fire-phasing, and 
as a result Lin Ziran was successful. He wrote the seven tracts of this work in order to 
provide others with helpful didactic texts (see the preface, dated 1250). 

The seven texts begin with the words “Huiyang zi says.” They contain neidan (^3 
fl theories about the conditions of human existence. The author speaks about Wei 
Boyang as “ancestor” (15a) and quotes, among others, [Zhang] Ziyang (6b, 7b), 
placing himself clearly within the tradition of the alchemy of the Song period. At the 
end of the text, Lin Ziran gives a chart presenting time phases and their emblematic 
correspondences . 

Florian C. Reiter 

Zazhu zhixuan pian H fit % 11 

8 juan 

By Bo Yuchan 3 £Si, zi Ziqing $T/jf , et al.; ca. 1225 

263.1 Xiuzhen shishu 1-8 (fasc. 122) 

“Directions to Mystery: A Miscellany.” This text comprises treatises and poems 
by Bo Yuchan, his teachers, and his disciples on the subject of Inner Alchemy. It 



is fisted in the Qianqing tang shumu 16.25a as Bo Yuchan zhixuan pian t=3 fillip IS 
eight juan. One of the texts in the present work is dated 1244 (1.10a). It is, however, 
not included in Yu Yan’s (fl. 1284) fist of Bo Yuchan’s works (cf. Xishang futan 
2.7b). The Daoyan neiwai hijue jit U ® tfc is nevertheless by Bo Yuchan and 
another miscellany entitled Ziqing [that is. Bo Yuchan] zhixuan ji [hSU figures 

in the Daozang jinghua lu ( Shumu leibian 53.24074). 

Most of the pieces included in this collection can be found elsewhere, as indicated 
below: 

Juan 1. “Bo Xiansheng jindan huohou tu S ^ fl fill HI an introduction 

to the Jindan huohou tu with explanations by Bo’s disciples; see 1309 Haiqiong chuan- 
daoji. 

Juan 2. “Huanyuan pian Jit MU”; see 1091 Huanyuan pian. 

Juan 3. “Ziting jing sec 1090 Cuixupian , “Yinfu sui fl fl ” a condensed 

version of 119 Yinfu jing sanhuang yujue. 

Juan 4. “Xiuxian bianhuo lun see “Gushen busi lun fl fl J'E fra 

Yinyang shengjiang lun HI fl Ira ,” and “Danfang fayu fl Jjf \f |p .” 

The four titles fisted above are also ascribed to Bo Yuchan in the Daozang jinghua 
lu. The “Xiuxian bianhuo lun” is one of the treatises included in the Zhixuan pian in 
the Daoyan neiwai hijue quanshu. 

Juan 5. “Jindan sibai zi ^ fl 0 fl fl”; see 1081 Jindan sibai zi. 

Juan 6. “Xie Zhang Ziyang shu M 'M ^ l*§ II ” (see Daoyan neiwai bijue quanshu, 
Daozang jinghua lu and Xie xianshijishu ci Uf f[I) 6fjr fl A I§] . Both of these works by B o 
Yuchan are mentioned in Xishang futan. 

Juan 7. Poems ascribed to Xu Jingyang and Zhongli Quan; “Dansui ge fl 
fiKfc” (by Xue Daoguang); see 1088 Huandan fuming pian. 

Juan 8. “Weisheng ge Ws A by Xishan xiansheng H [ 1 [ A A . 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Jindan dachengji AAA fiic A 

5 juan 

By Xiao Tingzhi If S [var. zi Yuanrui jtM, hao Liaozhen zi fl j)| fl (fl. 

1260) 

263.9 Xiuzhen shishu 9-13 (fasc. 123) 

“Collected Works on the Great Accomplishment of the Elixir.” The author was a 
disciple of Peng Si, one of Bo Yuchan’s most famous followers (cf. Xiao Tingzhi’s 
preface, dated 1260, in 687 Daode zhenjing san jie, preface, 8a). According to another 
source, Xiao Tingzhi, a native of Fuzhou }g'Jj'[ (Fujian), possessed two style-names (zi 
Yuanrui and Tianlai (cf. Quan Song ci 4-2777). 

The present work is quoted frequently in 100s Zhouyi cantong qifahui (e.g., 3.3b; 



[ 840 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



3 . A A Neidan and Yangsheng [ 841 ] 



5.18b; 6.2b). Since the latter has a preface dated 1284, the second half of the thirteenth 
century would seem the latest date for the collection. 

The work begins with diagrams illustrating the interaction of qi and jing fjf in the 
neidan J 5 } process, their circulation, and the rules of fire-phasing (9.ia-7b). These 
diagrams are followed by three poems and a treatise on the cyclically transformed 
elixir. The entire juan 10 comprises definitions of neidan nomenclature, in recorded 
conversations ( yulu §g$|) form. This part is entided “Jindan wenda 
(Questions and Answers on the Elixir). It is also included in 570 Yangsheng bilu 19a— 32b 
and is reproduced in the collection Jindan jiwen (juan 1) compiled by Hu 

Wenhuan (fl. 1596), in Gezhi congshu . 

Juan 11 and 12 comprise poems in different styles; two of these are addressed to 
friends (12.5b— 6a), the remainder are on neidan themes. The n-lyrics in 12.7a— 12b are 
reproduced in juan 7 and 8 of 1100 Minghe yuyin (edited in 1347), without attribution. 
In juan 13 we have a commentary on the Cuigong ruyao jing W A (on this 

work, cf. 13s Cuigong ruyao jing zhujie, where Xiao’s gloss is quoted extensively) and 
one on Li) Dong bin’s ci -lyric, tl icQinyuan chun jiQ' § § (cf. 136 Lii Chunyang zhen- 
ren Qinyuan chun danci zhujie). 

The Daozang jiyao edition, titled Jindan dacheng , is incomplete. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

3.A.4.d Other Neidan Traditions 

Qinxuanfu 

10 fols. 

260 (fasc. 121) 

“Rhapsody of Grasping Mystery.” A short and elegantly written treatise on Inner 
Alchemy in nine parts, of unknown authorship and date. Although no sources are 
quoted, the work makes extensive use of the metaphorical language of the Zhong-Lii 
school as exemplified in the Zhong-Lii chuandaoji M gf# (. 263 Xiuzhen shishu 

14-16). It should therefore date from the Northern Song period (960-1127). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taiqing yuanji zhimiao shenzhu yuke jing A jf jt Si M W W gfc 5 fl ffl 

37 fols. 

865 (fasc. 578) 

“Most Pure Book of the Divine Pearl and the Jade Bead and Supreme Wonder of 
the Original Principle.” As explained in the beginning of the text, “divine pearl” here 
refers to the essence of the sun, and “jade bead” to that of the moon. The anonymous 
author quotes a Kaitianji fj^ Aid that remains to be identified. 



This is a guide to the Inner Alchemy practice modeled on the sixty-four hexagrams 
of the Yijing 4 ^ . The system of this kind of practice corresponds to that of 999 Zhouyi 

cantong qi , but this work is only indirectly quoted here on page 36a, under the name of 
its reputed author, Wei Boyang. The hexagram cycle can be performed on a month- 
ly or daily basis. The latter variant, with two gua on which to model the practice, 

is in fact that which is also most widely used by the adepts of the above-mentioned 
work. The present text also proposes an hourly practice, and finally a combination of 
the three. 

Among the practical instructions, the text (page 35b) explains that for the realiza- 
tion of a yang “stroke” ( yao Si ) in a given hexagram, the adept should hold his or her 
breath during a period of time corresponding to thirty-six ordinary respirations and 
then swallow three times, whereas for a yin stroke the time should be that of twenty- 
four respirations, also followed by swallowing three times. Each time the energy 
should be forcefully guided downward to the Cinnabar Field (dantian fJEH)- 

This practical and simple guide of uncertain date is useful for the understanding of 
modern neidan A practice. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Zituan danjing ^ PH FJ 

19 fols. 

Southern Song (1127-1279) 

878 (fasc. 581) 

“Alchemy of the [Master of the] Purple Coil.” This is a short treatise on sexual 
alchemy. The presence of an incomplete rendering of the character kuang pE (a Song 
taboo), together with a number of citations from authors of the Northern Song dy- 
nasty such as Zhang Boduan (984-1082), allow us to date the present text to the 
Southern Song period. A remark at the end of the book states: “This book is not about 
the great alchemical way. It has never been known that one can obtain immortality by 
mounting women. The reason why [the book] is preserved here is in order to warn 
off those who might be deluded. This is not something to practice in order to become 
an immortal.” 

If there is a sexual innuendo in the author’s hao , it is difficult to identify. The text 
itself is rather explicit, as it states that the prescribed methods are useful for preserving 
one’s sexual energy in order to be able to accomplish his duties to his parents, that is, 
to beget children (3b). The author explains that the male orgasm is taiyang liuzhu A Wi 
A FJ: and the female orgasm taiyin xuanzhu A Pi: A 1A Each female menstrual period 
corresponds to six moon phases of five days. One of these is the menstrual period of 
Vermilion Liquid ( chishui AzK), whereas during each of the remaining five periods 
women produce mercury {gong A ) that can be turned into gold. The red liquid of 




[ 842 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangsheng 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Tangshmg [ 843 ] 



the menses is “kidney water” and corresponds to lead ( qian IS) • The clear red liquid 
produced toward the end of the menstruation is a drug that should be culled ( cai ££) 
at midnight. The calendar calculations for choosing the most appropriate moment are 
highly complex. The technique calls for coitus reservatus (18b). 

Many poetic terms are listed for the female sexual organs, most commonly “furnace 
of the reclining moon” (yanyue lu (IS Ti #1 ; I7a-i9a). 

Kristofer Scbipper and, Tuan Singling 

Tangsheng bilu 

32 fols. 

Early Yuan (1279-1368) 

579 (fasc. 321) 

“Secret Records on Tending Life.” This work is a good example of eclectic compila- 
tions popular during the Mongol period. The present anthology draws mainly upon 
Nanzong I^th sources of the southern (alchemical) tradition but also refers to other 
traditions. It includes seven texts. The first is “Recorded Sayings from the Cinnabar 
Room of Master Yuqi” (Tuqi zi danfang yulu ia-b), an abridged 

version of 24s Tuqi zi danjing zhiyao 2.13. The following oral instructions ( koujue P 
i£, ib) must be the continuation of the preceding text, but they do not figure in 24s 
Danjing zhiyao . The “Rote Instructions of Master Yuxu from Yichun” (' Tuxu zi Tichun 
xinjue 35 ii> 2a-sa), with the chart of the focused center ( Guizhong tu M 
t£HI), derive from the same source (24s Danjing zhiyao 3.7a-iob). The fourth text, 
“Internal Meaning of the Yellow Center” ( Zhonghuang neizhi eft ff f*j |f , 5a-8b), con- 
sists of three quotations: one by Yuzhen xiansheng 35 R (Liu Yu, patriarch of 
the Jingming zhongxiao school; this text does not figure in mo Jingming 

zhongxiao quanshu but is close in content to the second juan of this work); one by the 
Three True Lords Mao H1F ({ S , and the last by Yuqi zhenren 35 $§ R A (this text 
does not figure in 24s Tuqi zi danjing zhiyao). 

The fifth text, “Straightforward Instructions on Alchemical Classics by the Old 
Man Green Mist” (Qingxia weng danjing zhizhi i=f St H 13 S fa , 8b-i8a, a subtitle; 
the title Siduan jin |Z3I§I$ does not seem to fit the text) is a work by an anonymous 
disciple of Bo Yuchan, dated 1244. The next item, “Song of the Great Tao” ( Dadao 
ge AMIR i8a-i9a) is without indication of authorship but is actually a work by 
the Thirtieth Heavenly Master, Zhang Jixian (1092-1126; see 1249 Sanshi dai 

tianshi Xujing zhenjunyulu 3.1a, also included in I2S7 Qunxian yaoyu zuanji 2.2b). It is 
followed by two glosses. The last and longest text, “Questions and Answers Concern- 
ing Alchemy” (Jindan wenda 19a-32b, without indication of authorship), 

is the same text as 263 Xiuzhen shishu 10, where it is attributed to Xiao Tingzhi 
(fl. 1260), a second generation disciple of Bo Yuchan. 

Vincent Goossaert 



Tin zhenjun huandan ge zhu (is RS i§ If It 

9 fols. 

Commentary by Chen Tuan W.M,hao Xiyi %% (d. 989); poem: Five 

Dynasties (907-960) or earlier; commentary: early Song (960-1279) 

134 (fasc. 59 ) 

“Commentary on Yin Zhenjun’s Song of the Cyclically Transformed Elixir.” This 
text comprises a short alchemical poem ascribed to Yin Changsheng (^M4. (Yin 
zhenjun i|S),a legendary Han Taoist, and a commentary by Chen Tuan (d. 
989). The poem is first listed in the Bishu sheng xubiandao siku queshu mu as Tin zhenjun 
da huandan ge B R§ in one juan, but the Song shi gives the present title, 

omitting the character da A (VDL 139)- It must antedate the Song dynasty, however, 
since Peng Xiao (fl. 974) quotes it during the Five Dynasties (cf. 1002 Zhouyi cantong 
qifenzhang tongzhenyi 2.22a, 3.11b). 

The poem describes the Inner Alchemical process, beginning with the union of two 
inner ingredients and their purification (3b— 8b), a process that finally culminates in the 
completion of a cyclically transformed elixir of immortality (9b). 

The commentary, attributed to the famous Taoist master Chen Tuan, uses the 
nomenclature of the sexual arts (fangzhong M ‘-f 3 ) and interprets the poem as a tech- 
nique of augmenting and refining the seminal essence ( xiayuan jing TTtfS). This 
particular commentary is not mentioned in any of Chen Tuan’s biographies, but 
he is known to have written a book on a similar subject. This book, the Zhixuanpian 
f 0 £ H , is described in Chen’s biography in Song shi 457-I342I as a work dealing with 
“gymnastics, the art of nourishing [the vital principle], and the cyclically transformed 
elixir” ( Tan duo yangji huandan zhi shi gf ^ S. )§ fl" -^ ? )■ Since many books were 
forged in Chen Tuan’s name during the Northern Song (960-1127), the authorship 
of the commentary remains uncertain. 

The poem is reproduced with minor variations in 927 Taiqing yubei zi na. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Cui gong ruyao jing zhujie S Q A H M &£ ffl 

16 fols. 

By Wang Jie 3 Lift,hao Hunran zi ca. 1331 

135 (fasc. 60) 

“Commentary on Master Cui’s Mirror on the Admixture of Ingredients.” The title 
refers to a short poem in three- character fines by a certain Mr. Cui. The origin of this 
poem is unclear. Th ere are many works of the Song period (960-1279) with the title 
Ruyao jing AHM (VDL 134), in either one or three juan. Zeng Zao (ca. 1151) pos- 
sessed two completely different works with the same title (see 1017 Daoshu 37.12b). 
More than a century later, Xia Yuanding MliM had seven (see 109 Huangdiyinjujing 
jiangyi 4.14a). The Ruyao jing quoted by Xia Yuanding is a poem in five-character fines 
(cf. 146 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhenpian jiangyi 1.3b). 




[ 844 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng 

The earliest version of the Ruyaojing is a Tang (618-907) alchemical poem in five- 
character lines. This poem may well have been provided with explanations in prose by 
the alchemist Cui Xuanzhen flU of Minshan [_L| (Sichuan). Although the full 
title of this work was Jinbi qiantong ruyno huojing ji ^ItiffjiAltAMffi, in one 
juan ( Tongzhi , “Yiwen liie”; see VDL 119), we find this work also referred to as Jinbi 
qiantong huo ji Af E (pox Shiyao erya 2.3b; preface dated 806); Jinbi ruycw huojing 
Alii AM (233 Huandan zhongxian lun 10b; preface dated 1052); Cui gong ruyaojing 
S 2 A HI M ( 900 Danfang xuzhi 12a; preface dated 1163); or simply as Toying HUi 
( 1086 Tuzhuang xiehou lu 7a). According to a note in the Xin Tang shu , “Yiwen zhi,” 
Cui Xuanzhen lived during the Tianbao era (742-756). 

A second version of the Ruyaojing is linked to the name of Lu Dongbin; it is 
called the Tianyuan ruyaojing Jzjt A Hit- A fragment of this text is quoted in 263 
Xiuzhen shishu 2i.6b-9b, as an introduction to a diagram and a poem about the Yin- 
Tiger and the Yang-Dragon and their relation to the Trigrams kan ifc and li M ■ The 
fragment is signed Cui Xifan hew Zhiyi zhenren EE — R A, and dated 940. 

As to the latter poem, we find it referred to in a text attributed to Lu Dong bin: 
ioss Chunyang zhenren hunchengji 2.4b, where it is linked explicitly to the Ruyaojing. 
The same poem is quoted extensively during Song and Yuan (1279-1368) times in 
relation to the transmission of the Ruyaojing to Lu Dongbin (1017 Daoshu 37.4b; 
24<SXishan qunxian huizhenji 2.4a-b; 1067 Shangyang zi jindan dayao 6.4a). According 
to Zeng Zao, the Tianyuan ruyaojing was originally a manual for sexual practices 
that later was given a correct interpretation by Lu Dongbin (1017 Daoshu 3.4a, 6b), 
which may be the reason that Zeng gives only the section headings and not the actual 
text (37.i2b-i6a). These headings appear to be the final section of the Tianyuan ruyao 
jing but should actually follow the introduction given in the 263 Xiuzhen shishu. Lu 
Dongbin’s biography in the LZTT 45.2b claims that Lii received the Ruyaojing from 
Cui gong himself in 881. However, the citation that follows this indication refers to 
the present poem in three-character lines. 

A third version of the Ruyao jing is the Ruyao jing shangpian _h H ( 1017 Daoshu 
37.ia-i2b), a text that employs Buddhist terminology (Jingang wulun 2 Ira, 
xinyin 2 E[J, etc.). A long passage of this same text quoted in 263.17 Zazhujiejing ( Xiu- 
zhen shishu 21.4b) uses the same vocabulary but seems to come from a slighdy different 
version. 

Finally, there is our present version in three-character lines. It is also attributed 
to Cui Xifan. We find it for the first time in a complete form in the Jindan dachengji 
(263 Xiuzhen shishu i3.ia-9b) by Xiao Tingzhi if 2 2 (fl. 1260). From that time (late 
Song [960-1279] and early Yuan [1279-1368]), this version became the standard, and 
all quotations of Cui gong and Ruyaojing refer to it (see 141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen 



3 . A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 84s ] 

plan zhushu 3.13b and 5.21b; 142 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian sanzhu 3.6a, 4.21a and 
26a; 10 os Zhouyi cantong qifahui 5.22a and 6.29b; etc.). 

Yu Yan, in Xishang jutan (2.5b), claims that the author of the Ruyaojing lived on 
Bohe shan g Ulil in Hunan, and he mentions the commentaries by Xia Yuanding, 
Chu Yong fff*, and Xiao Tingzhi. The Zhizhai shulujieti (VDL 134) gives Yuanshan 
iH lU (for ii read Jt), in Jiangxi, as the residence of the author. 

Wang Jie, the commentator of our present text, was a contemporary of Chen 
Zhixu (before 1331). He interprets the poem as a guide to the Inner Alchemical pro- 
cess, to be performed every night from 7 P.M. to 5 a.m. Wang first describes breath 
control, then the interaction of yin and yang, and finally fire-phasing and the forma- 
tion of the elixir. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Lii Chunyang zhenren Qinyuan chun danci zhujie 

II fols. 

Attributed to Lu Yan B ag, hao Chunyang zhenren; commentary by Yu Yan lift 

fj£, hao Quanyang zi, Linwu shanren |JL| A^Pf'? (1258-1314) 

136 (fasc. 60) 

“Explication of the Alchemical Lyric ‘Spring in the Garden by the Qin’ by the Zhen- 
ren Lii Dongbin.” The Qinyuan chun A' SI # is an alchemical ci |W[ -lyric ascribed to 
Lii Yan, better known as Lii Dongbin, who composed the tune of the same name. 
Although it is not mentioned in any bibliography, it can be traced back to the eleventh 
century since the story of its transmission is recounted by Liu Fu Wlfr (1040-after 
1113) in Qingsuo gaoyi 8.82. The poem was revealed to njinshi i®dr, Cui Zhong 4 1 , 
in the city ofYueyang in Hunan (see Baldrian-Hussein, “Yiieh-yang”). 

The poem describes the neidan A fl - process, here called Qjfan huandan CiMiS f) 
(seven-times cyclically transformed elixir) : the collection of the True Yang at the hour 
of zi 2 , its union with True Yin to obtain the Seed, the purification by fire-phasing, 
and finally the accumulation of merit and transfiguration. The Yuan commentator Yu 
Yan (cf. 100s Zhouyi cantong qifahui) interprets the poem according to the practices 
of his school. The main interest of this commentary lies in the wealth of books and 
authors quoted by the commentator. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Baldrian-Hussein, “Yiieh-yang and Lii Tung-pin’s Ch’in-yiian ch’un.” 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 




[ H 6 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



Longhu zhongdan jue hI $6 rf 1 PF 

7 fols. 

228 (fasc. 112) 

“Instructions for [the Acquisition of] the Central Elixir from [the Union of] the 
Dragon and the Tiger.” This is a short treatise on Inner Alchemy. This undated text is 
stylistically modern (e.g., the seven-word poems at the end) and concerns a variety of 
practices. In addition to the meditative and respiratory exercises for the conception of 
the immortal embryo (tai Jjp), illustrated through the hexagrams of the Ttjing 
(e.g .,Ju fM for introduction and gou ^ for conception), the methodology calls for the 
recitation of spells in order to activate the energies of essence (jing f ft ), qi, and spirit 
(shen 1 $ ) for the transformation of the body. A series of nine poems decribes the entire 
cycle, ending in delivery (tuo i$), in terms of nine phases (hou f(5l) taking nine years. 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Huandan bijue yang chizi shenfang M / 5 } 77 

6 fols. 

By Xu Ziwei z * Mingdao tjfj (It ; end of the twelfth century 

232 (fasc. 112) 

“Divine Recipes for Nourishing the Infant according to the Secret Process of Re- 
turned Cinnabar.” The work explains in ten points the alchemical principles that lead 
to the production of the spiritual Infant. When the latter is able to leave the body 
through the fontanel, it should be nourished during three years, and then during nine 
symbolical years. 

During the years 1174-1189, Xu Ziwei began to search for a master. He met Peng 
Mengqu s on Mount Tongbo (in southwestern Henan, on the border 
with Hubei). Orally and with the help of diagrams, Peng transmitted the Way of Re- 
turned Cinnabar to Xu in the temple of Huaidu ?f|)H . 

At the end of the text, Xu gives the lineage of the transmission of the xiuzhen lj| 

from Zhang Tiangang S to Peng Mengqu, Xiao Yingsou HR B&.M, Xu Ziwei, and 
Lin Yuanding • In this lineage, Xu is presented as a native of Shanxi province, 

whereas here, in the indications given with his name on the first page, he hails from 
Xishan Hill. 



Catherine Despeux 



3 . A .4 Neidan and Yangsbeng [ 847 ] 




Gushen pian 
2 juan 

By Lin Yuan zi Shenfeng bao 
Xuanchao zi £ 14 TP; preface dated 1304 
252 (fasc. 119) 

“Dissertation on the Spirit of the Valley” (figs. 
26-27). This is a popular treatise on Inner Alchemy. 
The author, from Fujian (Minxiang preface, 
4b), gives Wufu HM (unidentified) as his place of 
origin. He defines the tradition to which he belongs 
as coming from Han Xiaoyao !§ , whereas his 

own teacher was a certain Yu zi Liian M H (pref- 

ace, 6a). Han Xiaoyao is known through a quotation 
from his work, the Neizhi tmgxuan bijue Pi Fb M 
in ioos Zhouyi cantong qi fahui 1.11b. 

There is another preface (dated 1315) by Zhao 
Congshan zi Sixuan gj, who had the 

work printed. 

The work is composed mostly 
of poems and short dissertations. 
The main topic is Inner Alchemy, 



figure 26. Representation of 
the crucible with die different 
stages of the alchemical process 
(2S2 2.2a) 




but other, more general topics 
are addressed. The virtue of the 
Beidou jing (the Dipper 

scripture) is sung (1.12a), as is the 
efficacy of the charm water of the 
Hunyuan rites ( Hunyuan fushui iH 
7]C; 1.9b and 1.14b). There are 
also other references to liturgical 
Taoism, as well as to sexual practice 
(2.16b). There is no mention of 
Quanzhen is (fif Taoism. 

Kristofer Scbipper 



figure 27. Water as the primordial element and its 
devolution (2S2 2.9a) 




[ 848 ] 3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng 



3 .A .4 Neidan and Yangsheng [ 849 ] 



Xiantian jindan dadao xuanao koujue 
11 fols. 

By Huo Jizhi zi Juchuan g|l| ; completed ca. 1249; published between 

1254 and 1257 
279 (fasc. 134) 

“Arcane Formula of the Great Alchemical Way of Former Heaven.” This is a short 
Inner Alchemical work that includes some diagrams. The text is preceded by two pref- 
aces by friends of the author, Liu Zicheng and You Yu JC'% 1 , dated 1251 and 

1249, respectively. The work ends with an undated postface by the author, followed 
by a preface by Guo Sanyi (dated 1119) and, finally, an anonymous postface 

dated 1257. 

The author, Huo Jizhi, claims diat the diagrams known as the Jindan tu 
originally belonged to his great-grandfather, who had shown them to Lin Lingsu 
who, in turn, immediately recognized them as the work of Chen Tuan. The dia- 
grams came into the possession of Guo Sanyi, who returned them to the Huo family, 
with which he had close ties. Later, Huo Jizhi’s father, a Taoist, realized the meaning 
of these diagrams and subsequendy wrote a koujue P t£ (oral instruction) on them. 

He had not yet published this work as intended when he 
died in 1254. It was printed by his son shortly afterward. Al- 
though no precise date is indicated, the printing must have 
taken place between 1254 and 1257, the date of the last postface 
mentioning the publication. 

The present text comprises diagrams that go back to 
the reign of Emperor Huizong (1100-1125) and the koujue 
by Huo Jizhi’s father, accompanied by explanations by the 
author (see fig. 28). Yu Yan possessed an edition that com- 
prised a preface by You Mushi (Xishang futan 2.8b). 

He quotes a long passage from this edition, of which only 
one sentence can be found in the present text (6a). He also 
gives the tide as Jindan koujue zbizhi Jf P tfe S whereas 
the present text reads Jindan yaowu zbizhi it 

HI and Koujue zbizhi P !£ S f g . 

The text includes an introduction by Huo Jizhi, where 
he explains that the notion of xiantian (Former 

Heaven) was superior to similar notions propagated by 
Chan practitioners (zuo Chan ^ipp ), that is, adepts of Xing- 
zong ftzN- Following this introduction are diagrams and 
explanations based on the Wuzben pian iaStMi, which is 



quoted frequently (3b-7a); alchemical poems (7a-8a); and finally the postfaces 
(8b-na). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Wang Mu, Wuzhen pian jianjie. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Chen xiansheng neidan jue |$i fa. ft fa 

27 fols. 

Chen Pu W. f t\ zi Chongyong fa ; after 1078 

1096 (fasc. 743) 

“Mr. Chen’s Instructions on the Inner Elixir.” This text is first mentioned in the 
Tongzhi, “Yiwen liie” 5.23a. According to the short anonymous preface, however, 
Chen Pu fled to Sichuan during the turmoil of the Five Dynasties (907-960). It was 
on Mount Damian of Qingcheng Ui of this province that he met Zhongli 

Quan and Lu Dongbin and was initiated into the Tao. In 1078, he encountered 
the statesman Zhang Fangping 38 W in Nandu jf $5 (present Nanyang m 
Henan). Zhang’s presence in Nanking during this period is attested in the Song shi 
318.10353 ff. The book, however, became popular only in the twelfth century. It was 
transmitted to Huainan yesou fa jfj I? §! by Chen (preface). This transmission is also 
mentioned in a preface dated 1264 (cf. 24s Tuqi zi danjing zbiyao i.ia-ib). 

Another version of the Neidan jue, attributed to “Niwan xiansheng Chen Pu }/£ 
is included in 263.17 Zazhu jiejing ( Xiuzhen shishu 17). This version is 
entided Cuixu pian W-lmWi, with the subtide Jiuzhuan jindan bijue 
an error confounding Chen Nan, the author of 1090 Cuixu pian, with Chen Pu. 

The preface is missing in the 263 Xiuzhen shishu version, and there the commentary, 
attributed to Chen Pu himself in our text, is tided jie ffi. Many additions and omis- 
sions, as well as the presentation (see, e.g., ia-ib, 6b-7a), point to a different edition 
of the text. 

The treatise includes practical instructions on neidan ft fa , the methods being 
divided into nine cycles ( jiuzhuan faff). After the adept has acquired the precious 
pearl (baozhu ^£ft,he or she purifies it through fire-phasing. The last cycle ends with 
the transfiguration of the alchemist. Each cycle is described by a poem in seven-word 
verse, with a commentary, which is then followed by a ci- lyric to the tune of Wang 
jiangnan with explanations, and, finally, by instructions in prose. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



D 




figure 28. Illustration 
of Returning to the 
Root (279 3b) 





3.A.5 Alchemy [ Ssi ] 



[ 8so ] 3. A. 5 Alchemy 

Dongyuan zi neidan jue j| 5 ] jc -f- 

2 juan 

Northern Song (960-1127)? 

1097 (fasc. 743) 

“Inner Elixir Explained by Master Dongyuan.” The work is listed in the Tongzhi , 
Yiwen liie,’ 5.23a, as comprising one juan. The author, Dongyuan zi was 

well-versed in both Taoist and Confucian literature. The Taoist Feng Dongyuan M 
PTC (A. 936-968) was just such a scholar (cf. 128s Tisheng bcwde zhuan 2.1a). The tide 
Dongyuan j[Bj 7 n, however, was bestowed upon several adepts during the reigns of 
Zhenzong (997-1022) and Huizong (1100-1125). Shen Ruoji (d. 1131), who 

was one of these adepts, practiced both neidan ^ fj- and waidan EJ (cf. 304Maoshan 
zhi i6.5a-5b). 

In the preface, the author declares his intention of giving a clearer account of the 
alchemical process than the Cantong qi taiyi zhi tu # [WJ % js : — jg gj, a work no longer 
extant, yet his own text is certainly abstruse. It is divided into twenty-one sections 
(pian H ) and makes use of Tijing $§? terminology to explain the purification of 
die Three Cinnabar Fields ( dantian )T EH ) through the preservation of the seminal 
essence, meditation, the practice of moral virtues, and the art of conducting the qi to 
the brain (preface and i.ia-ib). 

Juan 1 explains the origin of “true ingredients” and the process of transformation 
using eight hexagrams. Each discussion of the hexagram is followed by a quotation 
from the Tijing (zhuan jgc) and a poem (jue). 

Juan 2 comprises several discussions on meditation (2.5b ff.) and the circulation of 
the inner light ( shenguang Wit). The last pian uses hexagrams to explain the process 
of birth and death and its reversal to obtain immortality. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



3. A. 5 Alchemy 

In the course of the Tang dynasty (618-907), alchemical theory and practice were 
greatly transformed under the influence of works such as the Zhouyi cantong qi jSJ J| # 
(nj and the Guwen longhujing t*? ~$C. 16 . These and other related texts were instru- 

mental in the development of Inner Alchemy ( neidan f} ) as opposed to laboratory 
or elixir alchemy ( waidan Jf). As is evident from the previous section, neidan gradu- 
ally became an almost entirely distinct form of practice. The present section contains 
all the texts of the Song (960-1279) and later periods that explicitly concern waidan. 



The evolution of alchemy has often been explained as the result of a reaction against 
laboratory alchemy, which was held responsible for many cases of elixir poisoning, 
especially during the late Tang. However, as the present section bears out, laboratory 
alchemy by no means became defunct, even if the relatively small number of major 
texts and manuals clearly indicates a decline when compared with the number of texts 
from the medieval period. It is also remarkable in this respect that the works that 
can be dated to the Northern Song period (960-1127) are still relatively numerous. 
The last major manuals on laboratory alchemy, such as the Gengdaoji lUiMII, date 
from the Southern Song (1127-1279) period. Waidan texts become scarce in the Yuan 
(1279-1368) and Ming (1368-1644) periods. 

Xuexian bianzhen jue fill H 

6 fols. 

Northern Song (960-1127)? 

138 (fasc. 60) 

“Instructions for Discerning Truth in the Study of Immortality.” This small treatise 
on theoretical alchemy is mentioned for the first time in the Song shi, “Yiwen zhi” 
4.5198 (see VDL 159). It consists mainly of an explication of 922 Huanjin shu by Tao 
Zhi (d. 825). 

The text is composed of five paragraphs discussing the true alchemical ingredients, 
and, finally, of a poem called “Zimu ge T" fii ” (Song of the Mother and Child). 
This poem was well known by the end of the twelfth century (see the commentary of 
Weng Baoguang in 141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhen pian zhushu 4.15a and 14s Wuzhen 
pian zhushi 2.20b). The present work may therefore be of the same period. In the 
preface, however, the author mentions only the five paragraphs and does not speak of 
the poem and its commentary. These works could have been added to the work at a 
later stage. 

The poem has been attributed elsewhere to Zhongli Quan (see I2s8 Zhuzhen 
neidan jiyao 1.1b; this is a later text, where the poem is called “Huandan ge IS ” 
[Song of the Cyclical Elixir]). Another work quotes the poem as an “ancient song” 
(guge t*j %% ; see 261 Jindanju 26b). 

The five paragraphs are titled “Discerning the Truth,” “The Jewel” “Liquid Silver” 
“Mercury” and “Understanding the Alchemical Process.” According to the author, this 
treatise gives the essential features of the art of the Liquified Gold (jinyi zhi shu jjS 

2M). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 




[ 8s2 ] 3.A.5 Alchemy 



3.A.5 Alchemy [ 8s3 ] 



Jinhua yuyi da dan ^ ^ 3i ?{£ A rt 

19 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

910 (fasc. 590) 

“Great Elixirs of the Golden Flower and the Jade Liquor.” The tide of this collection 
of alchemical recipes is taken from the text of the first recipe (ia-2b), 'where jinhua 
l£?lp (golden flower) and yuyi A.® (jade liquor) are the names of two intermediate 
stages in the preparation of the zixia dan (Elixir of the Purple Mist). The use 

of qian as the unit of weight below the Hang shows that the compilation dates 
from after 992. 

About a dozen recipes are given altogether. Several methods include regimes of fire- 
phasing control ( huohou A fife ) ; the method described in i2a-b has the name “method 
for Embryonic Breathing” ( taixifa j§J j£). 

Fabrizio Pregadio 

Dadan qiangong lun Art KVA lira 

9 fols. 

Attributed to Jin Zhupo ; eleventh century or later 

923 (fasc. 596) 

“Discourse on Lead and Mercury of the Great Elixir.” The author of this short 
alchemical treatise is indicated in the heading as Jin Zhupo of the Tang dynasty (618- 
907). However, since the text quotes a poem by Zhang Boduan (cf .142 Ziyang 
zhenren Wuzhen pian sanzhu 2.19a), the eleventh century is the earliest possible date. 

A Jin Quanzi T‘, hao Zhupo , appears in another text of uncertain date, 
as the disciple of Shi Jianwu (fl. 806-820; see 149 Xiuzhen taiji hunyuan tu ia). 

The treatise is both theoretical and practical. It discusses correspondences between 
lead, gold, mercury, cinnabar, the elements, trigrams, directions and the origin of 
lead, quicksilver, calomel, and other substances. There are also practical recipes on 
the extraction of true lead and mercury from common lead, cinnabar, and silver (2a), 
another on extracting boxue H (arsenious oxide?) and huangya if If (litharge, lead 
monoxide) from minium and mercury (2a-; a). There are some instructions on pow- 
ders based on calomel (3b, 6b) and for making a great elixir ( dadan Art) with lead, 
mercury, and silver as the main ingredients. The recipes do not give detailed instruc- 
tions for luting, fire-phasing, or casing, as is common in older waidan rt rt texts. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



Huandan gejue jSrtSl’lfc 

2 juan 

Compiled by Yuanyang zi tcPjA; Song (960-1279) or later 

265 (fasc. 132) 

“Oral Formulas and Songs on the Cyclically Transformed Elixir.” This is a collection 
of alchemical poems attributed to Yuanyang zi (cf. 239 Huandan jinyi ge zhu). Since 
the first poem, however, mentions Lti Dongbin (1.2a), Northern Song (960-1127) 
would be the earliest date for this collection. 

Many of the poems can be found in earlier works of the Five Dynasties or the early 
Song. For the poems in i.i2b-i7b, for example, see 926 Da huandan zhaojian 10a, 16b, 
17a, and 22b. Part of the second poem, by Dou zhenren A (i-9b), is quoted in 
266 Jinyi huandan baiwenjue 10b. 

For the poem in juan 2, see also 238 Yuanyang zi jinyi ji ia-isb, where it is found 
with a different commentary. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Jiuzhuan lingsha dadan All Art 

12 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

893 (fasc. 587) 

“Nine-Times-Transmitted Elixir.” This text describes a method based on mercury 
and sulfur. The use of the qian H weight measure as the unit immediately inferior to 
the liang shows that the work dates from after 992. A post-Tang (618-907) dating 
is also suggested by several linguistic features. 

The first five sections (ia-3a) are concerned with the construction of the apparatus 
and the preparation and sublimation of qingjin tou WsfeSi (head [i.e., matrix] of 
cerulean gold), a mercury-sulphur compound. These sections correspond to the open- 
ing portions of 894 Jiuzhuan qingjin lingsha dan ia-2a, where they appear in a slightly 
different order. Other passages shared with the latter work are found in the following 
sections, which describe a complex method of treating qingjing tou in nine cycles. 

Fabrizio Pregadio 

Jiuzhuan qingjin lingsha dan /l H W ^ M rt 

5 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

894 (fasc. 587) 

“Nine-Times-Transmitted Elixir [Obtained] from Cerulean Gold.” This work de- 
scribes an alchemical method similar to that outlined in 893 Jiuzhuan lingsha dadan. 




[ 8 s 4 ] 3.A.5 Alchemy 



3. A. 5 Alchemy [ 8ss ] 



The same evidence cited for the latter shows that the present text dates from after 
992- 

The expression qingjin (cerulean gold) in the title refers to a compound of 
mercury and sulfur that is prepared in the first stage and is further refined in nine 
cycles. The process described here is more straightforward than that of 893 Jiuzhuan 
lingsha dadan; it consists simply in the addition of sulfur to the product of the preced- 
ing stage. 

Fabrizio Pregadio 

Yinyang jiuzhuan cheng zijin dianhua huandan jue 

5 fols. 

Tenth century? 

895 (fasc. 587) 

“Instructions on the Preparation of the Purple Gold, a Cyclically Transformed 
Elixir That Transmutes by Projection, [Obtained] in Nine Cycles [through the Ac- 
tion] of Yin and Yang.” This text includes a different version of the method described 
in 892 Taishang weiling shenhua jiuzhuan danshajue , a Tang work dating possibly from 
the seventh or the eighth century. The references to the fen if as the weight unit below 
die liang pR (2b and 3a) suggest that the present version dates from before the end of 
the tenth century. 

The descriptions given here are more concise and generally more reliable than 
those of the other version. The first four stages of treatment consist of two cycles of 
recompounding cinnabar after the extraction of mercury. The product is treated in the 
next three stages to prepare a huandan j§ (cyclically transformed elixir) and in the 
final two stages to prepare a purple gold ( zijin $|^) and a “projection powder” able 
to transmute mercury and lead into gold. The quotations from the Zhouyi cantong qi 
|n] 0 fu] found at the end of each of the nine sections, correspond to passages 

appearing in 2.25a, 2.27b, 2.21a, 1.26a, 2.25a, 1.30b, 1.31b, 1.25a, and 1.30b, respectively, 
in the edition of 1002 Zhouyi cantong qi fenzhang tongzhenyi. 

Fabrizio Pregadio 

Taiqing yubei zi A fit 3 £ 6 $ 

12 fols. 

927 (fasc. 597) 

“Jade Stele of the Taiqing [Heaven].” This is a short work comprising prose and 
poetry. It is mentioned in the Bishu sheng xubiandao siku queshu mu 2.38a as Yubei zi in 
one juan (VDL 99). The present title figures in the Songshi , “Yiwen zhi ,” 4.5189, which 



states that the text is a dialogue between Zheng Siyuan SPSJS (i.e., Zheng Yin) 
and Ge Hong. The latter is also indicated as the author. The dialogue, however, oc- 
cupies only the first three pages of the text, die remainder being a collection of prose 
and poems excerpted from various sources. 

Much of the material can be found elsewhere: For the dialogue (ia-3b), compare 
939 Dadan wenda ia-3b. The “Yaoping ge i§j M. aft ” (3b-4b) is the same as 888 Wei 
Boyang qifan danshajue, with some variants. For the “Wujin ge IljJz I t” and die 
“Longhu jue f|j !^i£” (5b-6b), compare 1083 Longhu yuanzhi (attributed to Qingxia 
zi W ft A ), which includes a better text but presents the material in a different order. 
Compare also 93s Danlun juezhi xinjian (3a-4b), which seems to reproduce a different 
version. The latter text (9a) quotes the first line of the Da huandan ge A ill 31' (9b), 
but it indicates a Cantong qi # [WJ as its source. For the Jinyi da huandan ge 

(na-i2a), compare 134 Yin zhenjun huandan ge zhu, which has some textual 
variants. Our text includes three additional lines at die end of the poem. 

Farzeen Baldrian -Hussein 

Shangdong xindan jingjue L jffi] A f} I? Hi 

3 juan 

Northern Song (960-1127)? 

950 (fasc. 600) 

“ Shangdong Instructions and Scriptures on die [Cultivation of the] Mind and [the 
Preparation of] Elixirs.” This text contains complementary information about Inner 
Alchemy and operative alchemy (2.ia-ib). It was compiled by the later followers of 
Taiji zhenren A@!K A (Xu Laile 'if A $/j ; see YJQQ 6.4b). The most frequendy 
quoted spokesman of these followers is Xianweng {[Ijil (i.e., Ge Xuan). Sui shu 
3.1049 already lists a Taiji zhenren jiuzhuan huandan jing AIE J! A Aft . 

The text presents, in three paragraphs, alchemical prescriptions, techniques, and 
rules, for which parallels can be found in Baopu zi neipian , “Jindan” (3.3b ff). The 
instructions {jue U() and commentaries on the statements by Ge Hong do not give 
any indications as to their sources. The same is true for the many methods {fa if ) that 
the text introduces. There is an exposition by Taiji zhenren on 1.13b, and an instruction 
by the same author on 2.7b. However, it is not possible to claim that the other com- 
mentaries, which are all clearly separated by the typography, can be attributed to Xu 
Laile or any other specific name. Zheng Siyuan ftfi ill (i.e., Zheng Yin) and Ge 
Hong are introduced as members of the line of transmission, which originated with 
Xu Laile. The sentences on 3.ia-ib constitute the introductory passage in 934 Taibojing 
ia-ib. 

Florian C. Reiter 




[ 8s6 ] 3. A. 5 Alchemy 



3.A.5 Alchemy [ 8S7 ] 



Huandan zhongxian lun 1| * 

25 fols. 

Yang Zai |J§ ^ , hao Baofu shanren IS (fi | 1 ( X ; 1052 
233 (fasc. 113) 

“Discourse of the Immortals on the Transmutation of the Elixir.” The date is pro- 
vided in the preface by the author, a native of Xihe (Shanxi). The text contains 
a collections of sayings by different gods and immortals, starting with the Heav- 
enly Worthy of Primordial Beginning, Lord Tao, Lord Lao, the Yellow Emperor, 
and others, and ending with more recent alchemists like Lu Dongbin and Liu 
Haichan. A second part contains instructions, apparently by Yang Zai himself, on 
alchemy ( waidan ft ): on how to choose the place for the experiments and how to 

build the furnace. Yang describes the phasing of the fire ( hrnhou 'Jc fg) according to 
the helical phasing method (i.e., the increase and decrease of fuel in conformity with 
the basic cycle of thirty days, divided into six phases [liuhou Af^], each subdivided 
into two parts; for details, see Sivin, “The theoretical background of elixir alchemy,” 
274)- Also discussed are the ways to obtain and use the “real” ingredients of alchemical 
lead and mercury, the elimination of toxic principles in the elixir, and the effects of its 
ingestion. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Dadanji 

7 fols. 

Attributed to Wei Boyang §1101 $§,hao Taisu zhenren 

899 (fasc. 588) 

“Record of the Great Elixir.” This short alchemical work is first listed in the Chong- 
wen zongmu 9.19b. The use of the weight measure dafen fjr} suggests a date after 
922. 

The work is a piecemeal composition, as are many of the late Tang (618-907) and 
Five Dynasties (907-960) alchemical texts. The series of quotations and theoretical 
(ia-2b) explanations were excerpted from the same source as 93s Danlun juezhi xinjian 
3a-4a and 927 Tailing yuhei zi 5a ff. The present text, however, is abridged. The 1083 
Longhu yuanzhi gives a clearer account but in a different order. 

The remainder of the text deals with: the doses of the ingredients to be used for 
the elixir (2b— 3b); fire-phasing (3b— 4a; cf. 1083 Longhu yuanzhi 6b— 7b); and a poem 
and explanations on the use of ingredients and alchemical utensils (4b-7a). This last 
section is the only one not included in the alchemical texts mentioned above. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



Danfang aolun ffjiWm 

17 fols. 

By Cheng Liaoyi 7 — , hew Xuexian zi 1020 

920 (fasc. 596) 

“Recondite Discourses on the Elixir Laboratory.” These discourses are presented 
in sixteen tracts dealing with the essences and products of operative alchemy ( waidan 

fl-). In 1018, Cheng Liaoyi had met his teacher Wei Junyan MSM in Nanking. 
Wei transmitted to him “secrets of the elixirs” and gave him oral instructions for their 
production. Cheng Liaoyi returned to Hunan (Mount Heng ffj li|), where he success- 
fully practiced these instructions. This text describes the results of his efforts (preface, 
dated 1020). 

The sixteen paragraphs define essences such as true lead and true cinnabar. They 
also describe their effects when ingested and the methods of their production. The 
text mentions cases of misunderstanding or mishandling of alchemical processes, for 
which certain contemporaries are blamed. The subsequent losses and mistakes are to 
be blamed exclusively on such errors. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Ganqi shiliu zhuan jindan *3, Tl 

10 fols. 

Song (960-1279)? 

911 (fasc. 591) 

“Golden Elixir from Sixteen Cycles of Qi-Reaction.” This is a short, incomplete 
treatise on the sixteen-stage technique of preparation of an alchemical compound. 
Five kinds of ingredients are heated in a crucible, to be later mixed with mercury. The 
ingredients will interact with the mercury, hence the term ganqi (reaction of qi) 
in the title. 

Of the sixteen stages, only those corresponding to stages 8 (in part?) to 16 are 
preserved. The remainder of the text has a clear description of the alchemical furnace 
(with illustration) and of the elixir preparation. The text is at times close to 900 Dan- 
fang xuzhi, but could be earlier, and less influenced by Longhu jing || if, |f theory. The 
yanghuo lu MlkM calls for the ashes of sacrificial paper money ( zhiqian hui IftHM), 
which indicates a Song or later date. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bing ling 




[ 8;S ] 3. A. 5 Alchemy 



Canton q qi wu xianqlei biyao # M 5 o: E ffl II E I? 

6 fols. 

Attributed to Wei Boyang submitted to the court by Lu Tianji UtA 

(fl. im-1117) 

905 (fasc. 589) 

“Arcane Essentials of the Similarities and Categories of the Five [Substances] from 
the Cantonq qiV This is a short theoretical treatise on alchemy attributed to Wei Bo- 
yang. The text, it seems, was submitted to court by Lu Tianji lM A during the 
Zhenghe period (1111-1117; see Ho and Needham, “Theories of categories,” 21). A Wu 
xianqlei E f 0 in one juan is listed in various Song catalogues (see VDL 81). The 

present title, without the last two characters (biyao ), is mentioned in the Tonqzhi , 

“Yiwen liie” 5.6b. 

As the title indicates, this text is derived from a Cantonq qi wu xianqlei and was 
considered by some to be the second chapter of the Cantonq qi. This view is, however, 
refuted in the introduction. 

The tradition that Wei Boyang wrote a Cantonq qi wuxinq xianqlei E fj ffl if! 
goes back to his biography in the Shenxian zhuan ^ f[Ij fH ; but the Cantonq qi wu 
xianqlei in two pian M described by Liu Zhigu £fl E (eighth century) explains 
the alchemical process using Yijinq J|$f terminology (cf. 1017 Daoshu 26.1a), which 
is not the case in our text. A similar description of the Cantonq qi wu xianqlei is also 
found in other Cantonq qi commentaries (see, e.g., 999 Zhouyi can tonq qi 3.7b and 1002 
Zhouyi cantonq qifenzhanq tonqzhenyi 3.7b). Nevertheless, part of the main text (ib-2a) 
figures in versified form in 888 Wei Boyanq qifan danshajue ia-3a (Tang, 618-907). In 
addition, the text uses a number of esoteric names for substances, most of which can 
be found in 901 Shiyao erya (preface dated 806). According to the introduction, the 
Wu xianqlei deals with the control of the three yellow substances (sulfur, realgar, and 
orpiment) and the two precious things (lead and mercury). The text elucidates the 
theory that only substances of the same category ( tonqlei |H] fjj ) can react to each other. 
It classifies the substances as yin or yang and applies the theory of the Five Elements 
(wuxinq E 'il ) and the six acoustic pitches (liilii S 'i$ ) to all forms of chemical change 
and reaction. Lead, mercury, sulfur, realgar, orpiment, and copper carbonate are the 
ingredients used for the great cyclically transformed elixir (da huandan Ailtfl; 6b). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ho and Needham, ‘Theories of categories.” 



Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



3.A.5 Alchemy [ SS9 ] 



Lonqhu huandan jue sonq II M fl ® 

20 fols. 

By Lin Taigu fl AE ; commentary by Gushen zi EWE; Northern Song 

(960-1127)? 

1082 (fasc. 741) 

“Ode on the Formula of the Dragon-and-Tiger Cyclically Transformed Elixir.” 
This is an alchemical poem in seven-word verse by Lin Taigu, with a commentary 
by Gushen zi. According to a biographical note of the commentator, Lin Taigu was 
a native of Bingzhou Taiyuan EAI A® (in Shanxi). Lin was summoned to court by 
the [Northern Song] emperor Taizong (r. 976-997) and later retired to Huayang lj§ 
|i§ in Yizhou f* 'J'H (Chengdu, Sichuan). The commentator’s hao, Gushen zi, is com- 
mon to many Taoists between the Five Dynasties (907-960) and the Yuan period 
(1279-1368). The poem mentions Lu Dongbin, who, according to the commentary, 
had “recendy attained the Tao (9a). 

The poem and the commentary are in the Cantonq qi ^ |W] ^ and the Lonqhu jinq 
fizgig tradition and may be interpreted in both neidan A fl- and waidan flfl terms. 
The commentary quotes several well-known alchemical works, such as Tao Zhi’s 
Huanjin shu M E as well as a number of lost works, including the Shenshui huachi 
lun W 7 k ip '/til Ira , the Zhonqyuan lun A JCm (VDL 79 ), and the Wuminq daozheqe 

E il; E (VDL 143). The Yunanq sonq Eft® quoted here (8a) is referred to 
Southern Song (1127-1279) texts as Yuhu sonq EH® (cf. 230 Zhuzhen lun huandan 
jue). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Lonqhu huandan jue || St fl- 

16 fols. 

Commentary by Li zhenren $ R A; Northern Song (960-1127) 

1084 (fasc. 741) 

“Formula of the Dragon-and-Tiger Cyclically Transformed Elixir.” This work com- 
prises three alchemical d-lyrics. The title is a combination of the headings of the first 
two poems: “Longhu jue and “Huandan jue jj§ fl Ik .” 

Since the third poem, the “Qinyuan chun E S # ,” can be traced to the end of the 
eleventh century (cf. 136 Lu Chunyanq zhenren Qinyuan chun danci zhujie), the present 
text must have been compiled after that date. A Li zhenren huandan qe $ R AiSfl 
D: in one juan is mentioned in the Chonqwen zonqmu 9.22b, possibly referring to this 
work. 

Two of the poems include a commentary by Li zhenren. It is uncertain whether 
he is the author of the poem “Huandan jue,” which has no commentary. Li zhenren’s 
commentary to the “Longhu jue” is alchemical, but whether neidan A fl or waidan 



[ 86o ] 3. A. 5 Alchemy 



3.A.5 Alchemy [ 86i ] 



is unclear. His quotations are taken mainly from standard alchemical texts such 
as 922 Huanjin shu by Tao Zhi (d. 825), 906 Tin zhenjun jinshi wu xianglei, and the 
lost work Taiyi zhi tu. The “Qinyuan chun” commentary is, however, a clear neidan 
interpretation. This text is an important source for Lu Dongbin’s early poetry since 
almost all the quotations can be found in two collections of his poems (see, e.g., ioss 
Chunyang zhenren huncheng ji 2.5a, 16a, and the Jindan shijue compiled by Xia Yuan- 
ding). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Shenxian yangshen bishu fill if A Alfa 

18 fols. 

Edited by Chen Xianwei, hao Baoyi zi # 2 — f- (fl. 1234); also attributed to 

Liu Jingxian (fl. 351) 

948 (fasc. 599 ) 

“Secret Arts of the Divine Immortals for Tending Life.” This is a small collection 
of excerpts, taken from other sources. The editor, here indicated only by his hao , also 
wrote ioo7Zhouyi cantong qijie (preface 1234). 

A first group of recipes concerns nine alchemical compounds (ia-sa). A second 
group (sa-ioa) is called “Baxian diane fa A fill It) H A ” (Trifles of the Eight Immor- 
tals). These recipes are herbal preparations for various purposes. A third set has differ- 
ent auxiliary recipes for surviving in times of dearth and famine, such as economizing 
on oil (12a) or making especially long-burning candles (sheng lazhu fa ?£ ; 

11b) that last for one or two months. These practical methods are followed by a long 
prescription for food abstention in times of famine ( pigu fang Of fz A I7a-i8a). This 
prescription is a text thought to have been presented by Liu Jingxian jglj H fc to the 
ruler of the Later Zhao dynasty in 351. The prescription calls for the use of beans and 
cereals (glutinous rice) as well as sesame. These ingredients were made into balls the 
size of a fist and then are steamed. After eating three balls, hunger was stilled for seven 
days. No other food was to be taken. A second intake, also of three balls, sufficed 
for forty-nine days. A third, identical meal would last for three hundred days. When 
thirsty, the adept was to drink ground sesame with water. To revert to a normal diet, 
the adept had to eat three boxes of sunflower seeds made into a soup. This prescrip- 
tion was engraved in a rock near the Taiping xingguo si A ^ H IS tF in the Hanyang 
military district These names belong to the Song period (960-1279). 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bing ling 



Lingsha dadan bijue M A H M' afe 

23 fols. 

Southern Song (1127-1279)? 

897 (fasc. 587) 

“Secret Instructions on the Great Elixir of the Wondrous Mineral.” Lingsha M'/jP 
can be a name for black sulfide of mercury or a synonym of dansha J 5 }- {$, the unrefined 
form of cinnabar. In this particular text, however, lingsha stands for Baoyi lingsha 
— lift!', the wondrous mineral drug that bridges Inner and Outer Alchemy. The first 
kind of practice is assumed to be known. As for the second, the text prescribes a drug 
made of “sixteen ounces of sulfurized mercury ( liugong (fi zp. ),” from which ten ounces 
of white lead are obtained. This drug is made into black grains and mixed with bilious 
alunite and black plums and then placed into an earthen vessel to cook with rice vin- 
egar. The “black metal” is heated until the substance is “subdued” and decomposed. 
It is then left to rest and eventually opened. The contents are put into a sulfur casing, 
obtained by heaping a first layer of the residue of the lead substance on the bottom 
of a reaction vessel, then a layer of sulfur, and then again a layer of lead. This casing is 
heated, according to a detailed table of fire-phasing. The resulting first phase is called 
Tuoyang boti lingsha Kit fi 38 © (wondrous white-bodied mineral released after 
incubation; 3a-b). Eight other phases follow, to make a complete operation of Nine- 
Times-Transmuted Elixir alchemy. 

This particular method was transmitted by Ge Xuan to Zheng Siyuan fULSall 
(i.e., Zheng Yin) and Ge Hong. The latter related it to the Thirtieth Heavenly 
Master, Zhang Jixian (1092-1126), who, in 1101, taught it to Zhang Shizhong 

4 1 , a Taoist at the court of Song Huizong (1101-1125), in order to help the sov- 
ereign beget children. When Wang later left the court, he transmitted to method to a 
Buddhist monk called Guiyan chanshi §fp . This disregard for historical chro- 

nology suggests a late date for the compilation of this work. 

Following the first part of the text, there are a number of miscellaneous instructions 
and recipes centered on the theme of lingsha , including a nine-phased process of refin- 
ing sulfur called Jiuzhuan jindan jue A flfA A il£ (Nine-Times-Transmuted Alchemy; 
I5a-i7b). 

The following “Chisong zi sizhuan jue lists four different recipes 

for making lingsha , the first being related to a method for making gold. Then follows 
a “Taiji lingsha fu A ffi M PP 1 st a poetic description of the alchemical process using 
sexual analogies. At the end there is a “Laojun lingsha jue ^SMPPiP ,” a short poem 
on the major tenets of alchemical theory. 



Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 




[ 862 ] 3. A. 5 Alchemy 



3. A. 5 Alchemy [ 863 ] 



Biyu zhusha hanlin yushu gui IE Ml Eft 

8 fols. 

By Chen Dashi of Western Shu Southern Song (1127-1279) 

898 (fasc. 587) 

“Formula of Blue Jade and Red Cinnabar from the Jade Tree in the Cold Forest.” 
This is a short alchemical treatise based on poems with a commentary. The term hanlin 
(cold forest) denotes the realm of death, as explained on 4a. The jade tree is the tree of 
life in this world where all is impermanent. The first part is rather esoteric, but pages 
6a-8a contain precise instructions concerning a process involving yinqian that 
is, silver-bearing lead. 

There are several indications concerning the transmission of the recipes. A prescrip- 
tion for Zuijin chi 6? ^ 'M on 5b is said to have been transmitted to Fan Dongsou HI 

H ( jinshi jft i , 1235). After 126s, Fan obtained the post of imperial diarist qiju sheren 
X- On page 6a he is said to have lived at a Taoist academy ( daoyuan in 

Hangzhou. This may have been at the end of his life. The yinqian recipe is said (8a-b) 
to have been in the possession of the family of a certain Wang Yuanzhong TLjzJ 1 ( hao 
Boyun weng SSH) of Taiyuan for a long time. Later the high official Lii (Lii xiang fu 
S ) in Bianliang fK Wi (Kaifeng) obtained the recipe and gave it to a member of 
the Qian family (Qianfu Iff ), who then gave it to the Jing family Iff . The author 
obtained it from them. So the recipes in this book, all duly tested and found efficient, 
came from great dignitaries of the old and new Song capitals such as the Jings and the 
Gentleman in Attendance Fan Dongsou (here Fan $3? is erroneously written Wei fa ). 
The author then brought them to Sichuan. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 

Xiulian dadan yaozhi h 

2 juan 

Southern Song (1127-1279)? 

912 (fasc. 591) 

“Important Indications for the Refining of the Great Elixir.” This is a fairly de- 
tailed handbook for laboratory alchemy. The date and the author are unknown. The 
author says of himself that for some twenty years he went from place to place search- 
ing for books and the right instructions for the practice of alchemy (1.9b); finally an 
extraordinary person revealed them to him. What the author received was an esoteric 
cosmological theory (9b), but he offers no details as to texts or teachers. The present 
handbook uses references and source indications sparingly. Yin Changsheng Hi it 
(fe is quoted on page 2.6b (together with Laozi giving alchemical instructions). On 
i.23b-24a, a recipe is given that “Lii, the Patriarch of Pure Yang” Chunyang Lii zushi 



M Pit S ffl M is supposed to have written on the walls of his cave, which suggests that 
the present work dates to the Southern Song. A certain resemblance in subject matter 
and treatment is apparent between this text and goo Danfang xuzhi as well as gn Ganqi 
shiliu zhuang jindan. For instance, all three works have the formula for Boxue shenju £) 
S -Wff (compare our text i.i2a-b with goo Danfang xuzhi 14a and gu Zhuang jindan 
8b). Also the technical indications regarding stills, phasing, and so on are similar from 
one text to the other. If the present text dates, like the preceding ones, to the South- 
ern Song, then the cyclical year indication dinghai T ^ on 1.12b could correspond to 
1167. 

The text sets out to give the principles of laboratory alchemy, followed by a number 
of recipes. The second juan describes the use of a fireproof asbestos bag ( huanhuojuan 
fK.lk.%^). Plants are used in the process of casting a reaction vessel with the lost- wax 
technique (2.ib-3a). In certain instances, a preparation has to be kept warm on the 
naked belly of the practitioner for a period of forty-nine days (2.5a). Some of the pro- 
cedures are illustrated. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 

Zhujia shenpin danfa jj§ ^ 1 $ up FJ 

6 juan 

Compiled and edited by Meng Yaofu H , hao Xuanzhen zi ^ R ~P ; Song, 

before 1163 

918 (fasc. 594) 

“Alchemical Prescriptions of Divine Quality from all Specialists.” This is a kind of 
scrapbook on laboratory alchemy, composed of texts of different periods. The first 
juan is devoted to generally identifiable excerpts from BPZ, especially from the chapter 
on alchemy, “Huangbo pian ft S M •” From page 8b onward, the quotations derive 
from other sources. On 1.12a, there is a method authored by Xuanzhen zi, the editor 
and compiler of the present collection. This person, called Meng Yaofu, is not known 
elsewhere. From juan 2 on, the work carries his signature under the chapter titles. The 
entire juan 2 is his work. It is devoted to ritual prescriptions for choosing an appropri- 
ate place for refining cinnabar ( xiudan zedi yishi In a preface (2.2a 

ffi), beginning with the words hundun weifen (Et '{'41 ^ frj (before Chaos was divided), 
the author explains that his work should be titled Jindan biyao cantong lu 
#fn]|f . This title is quoted repeatedly in goo Danfang xuzhi by Wu Wu ^ 

fH (hao Ziran zi § fff), which has a preface dated 1163. The present work therefore 
must be earlier than that date. 

The philosophy behind this compilation was to include all texts deemed useful and 
explicit, regardless of style or redundancies. In many instances, the author indicates 




[ 864 ] 3. A. 5 Alchemy 



3. A. 5 Alchemy [ 86s ] 



that he had tried the recipes and found them useful (e.g., 3.8a). Some entries are re- 
dundant, such as the “Hua Gengfen fa on 3.11b and 6.7a. The numerous 

quotations from various sources are assembled without apparent system. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 

Zhiguiji 

9 fols. 

By Wu Wu haa Ziran zi § $£-p; ca. 1163 

921 (fasc. 596) 

“Collection of Basic Explanations.” This work is a collection of quotations from 
important alchemical texts. These quotations demonstrate, according to the author, 
the fundamental principles of the alchemical process. The work was compiled before 
1163 as it is mentioned in the same author’s preface to 900 Danfang xuzhi. 

Wu Wu, who also styled himself Gaogai shanren jSi H |JL| X, after the sacred 
mountain in Fujian, possessed a good knowledge of alchemy, both neidan 0 fl- and 
waidan and his preface advocates the practice of both these systems in the quest 
for immortality. Among the techniques used in neidan , Wu Wu’s preference lay in 
concentration and breath retention ( cunshen biqi a technique resembling 

Chan meditation {Chan ding As for waidan, the author says that only one 

ingredient should be used, namely, cinnabar ( dansha Tf-ffb), since it had the magic 
property of preserving both body and spirit. All other substances, says the author, are 
toxic. 

The work comprises a preface and five sections dealing with the cyclically trans- 
formed elixir ( huandan jSfl"), the ingredients of which are described as true lead 
and true mercury and fire-phasing ( huohou ffcfH). Wu Wu’s quotations are borrowed 
mainly from 926 Da huandan zhaojian. Sections 4 and 5, on the mutual production 
and destmction of the Five Elements and fire-phasing, are in part based on 1083 Longhu 
yuanzhi. The principal alchemical work, according to Wu Wu, is the Jinbi longhu jing 
xiz It II which he considered to be wrongly attributed to Huangdi and actually 
transmitted by Shennong ^ H • 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Yuzhuang xiehou lu ££ ^ iHc 

11 fols. 

By Wu Wu hao Ziran zi § ca. 1187 

1086 (fasc. 741) 

“Record of a Chance Encounter in a Fishing Village.” This is a short alchemical 
treatise by Wu Wu of Mount Gaogai jt 5 H (Fujian). The author was well versed in 



both laboratory alchemy and Inner Alchemy, as is evident from his other works in the 
Daozang: goo Danfang xuzhi and 921 Zhiguiji. 

In the short preface to the present text, Wu emphasizes the old Taoist idea that the 
alchemical oeuvre can be achieved only through the combined efforts of three persons. 
He recounts his meeting with two other friends who shared a similar desire to achieve 
the elixir. Wu Wu indicates that their experiment began in 1187. 

The account begins with the different names of the elixir jinyi dahuan dan 
iSf} and its ingredients. These names are followed by a description of five cycles cor- 
responding to the Great Beginning (Taichu jxffl ), the Great Ultimate (Taiji ^ jfi ), the 
division into yin and yang, the four directions with their symbols ( sixiang 0|^), and 
the center corresponding to Earth. This description is followed by a short extract on 
fire-phasing by Caoyi zi ^ (cf. 132 Xiuzhen liyan chaotu and 1017 Daoshu 33.11b). 

The work ends with two poems, the first in praise of the friends’ meeting, the sec- 
ond on the discovery of the Lead of Former Heaven ( xiantian qian in the 

furnace on the eighteenth day of the eleventh month. The present text is especially 
noteworthy for its numerous quotations from Tang alchemical texts that are no longer 
extant in the Daozang. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Danfang xuzhi 

14 fols. 

By Wu Wu M'K, hao Ziran zi preface dated 1163 

900 (fasc. 588) 

“Requisite Knowledge for the Alchemical Laboratory.” The author has two other 
works on alchemy in the Daozang: 921 Zhiguiji fg §§ Jj| (here mentioned in the pref- 
ace) and 1086 Yuzhuang xiehou lu The latter text is dated 1187. Wu calls 

himself Gaogai shanren ifti H [ 1 | A, after the mountain of that name in western Fujian 
(present Yongtai zk#). 

The text is marked (14b) as incomplete. The author’s purpose is to provide detailed 
instructions for those who set out to pratice laboratory alchemy, so that they will not 
have to deal with all the difficulties he himself encountered in his quest for reliable 
information. The work quotes a number of sources, most of which are unknown 
elswhere. The author shows close familairity widi the theoretical framework of the 
Longhu jing ift I?, and Cantong qi HR!?. 

He begins with the all-important choice of two experienced companions for the 
enterprise. Here, and in many other places, Wu quotes the Cantong lu H (nj , that is, 
the Jindan biyao cantong lu fl f\ tyk 1 ? ^ |Hj by Meng Yaofu (see 918 Zhujia shenpin 

danfa). For examples of passages transcribed verbatim by Wu Wu from this source. 




[ S66 ] 3.A.5 Alchemy 



3. A. 5 Alchemy [ 867 ] 





figure 29. The alchemical altar 
(900 5b). Ming reprint of 1598. 
Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 
9546/893) 




figure 30. A furnace for the 
extraction of mercury (900 7a). 
Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy 
of the Bibliotheque nationale 
de France. (Chinois 9546/893) 



compare 2bi, 2bio, and 3b4 in the present text with 
918 Shenpin danfa 2.na6, 2.6b3, and 2.nb.4, respec- 
tively. 

As to the choice of a suitable place for the labora- 
tory, Wu proposes a blessed site (judi ) such as 
die Gaogai shan where he lived. The laboratory had 
to be oriented in a particular way. Here Wu quotes a 
work that serves as his guide throughout, the Huolong 
jing ik. IlfS, ascribed to Sima Ziwei (3a). There 
should be no women present, nor Buddhist monks 
and nuns, chickens or dogs. Incense should be kept 
burning constandy. Whenever entering the labaratory, 
one should don clean clothes. No pungent vegetables 
should be eaten. The water, earth, charcoal, and such 
used in the process should be especially pure. 

An altar should be erected according to a number 
of specifications. The description is illustrated (5b; 
fig. 29). Several kinds of precious metals and minerals 
should be buried at its base. This altar was in fact the 
alchemical furnace (lu M ), also called the Platform of 
the Elixir [dantai f}Sr). A number of openings on 
all sides facilitated the firing. The crucible ( ding M) 
was placed on top. An ancient mirror was also placed 
there, as well as a number of votive lamps. 

Measures should be taken to protect the elixir 
from demons. The rites to be performed for this 
protection are also given (6a). The different al- 
chemical vessels, their shape and use, are decribed 
and illustrated, as are the rites to be performed 
in conjunction with their use. Next the method 
for refining lead ( qian $Q ) to obtain mercury and 
other derivatives is discussed, up to the comple- 
tion of the elixir (see fig. 30). The last, incomplete, 
paragraph concerns the ingestion of the alchemical 
substance. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 



Gengdao ji 

9 juan 

Southern Song to Yuan (1127-1368), with possible Ming (1368-1644) additions 

953 (fasc. 602-603) 

“Collected [Texts] on the Way of [Refining] Gold.” Geng H, the seventh of the 
Heavenly Stems, stands here for the West, and hence for the element metal, especially 
gold. This work is a collection of some twenty texts on laboratory alchemy, most of 
which feature the names of their authors or transmitters in the title. There is no preface 
or indication of a compiler. In juan 1, there is a “Wenzhen zi jindan dayao baojue fC 
the work of one Mengxuan jushi H! If jgj dr , dated 1144. There 
are also other names, such as Pu zhenren fif (H k (2.12b), whose arts were transmitted 
to a certain Ge Kejiu H nj (X, who in turn passed them on to Chen Shuzi I'iji iff 2P • 
Further on in the same juan (15a) is a recipe signed by the same Chen Shuzi. The final 
recipe is for curing leprosy ( damn laifeng yew kMM HI II). It is mostly composed of 
highly toxic ingredients. 

In 3.2a-b, the undated preface by Yang Qin jHUj to the Taishang lingsha dadan k 
k'Sifypkk refers to the transmission of the text to a certain Zhang Shizhong 
cfa . This passage is identical to 897 Lingsha deuian hijue 2a. 

On the whole, this collection, which is well edited and contains precise recipes, 
seems to date from the Southern Song. Chen Guofu (Dcwzang yuanliu xukao , 345), 
however, remarks that the place name Jiangxi 22(3 on 2.5b did not exist before Ming 
times. On the next page (2.6a) there is a mention of calamine or zinc bloom ( ganshi 
), and the Arab word for this substance is also given: “The Huihui [H [3 call this 
tuotiya 3 $ if This reference points to the Yuan dynasty. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 

Jinhua chongbi danjing bizhi ife M '/4 1 i§ J3 M -1$ if* 

2 juan 

Transmitted by Bo Yuchan Q 324®, Peng Si |^|g, and Lan Yuanbo H07C ; 

preface by Meng Xu (dated 1225) 

914 (fasc. 592) 

“Arcane Directions [from the Book of the] Golden Flower for Ascent into the 
Biluo H it! Heaven.” This is an alchemical work of rather obscure origins. In his 
preface on the transmission of the text, Meng Xu, a native of Sichuan and descendant 
of Meng Chang (934-965) of the Later Shu dynasty, attributes the first juan to 
Bo Yuchan. Meng claims to have obtained the text from the latter’s disciple Peng 
Si during a voyage in Fujian, but he did not put the instructions to use. In 1220, he 
received another text from Lan Yuanbo (juan 2 of the present compilation), which 
brought additional clarification to Peng Si’s work. Meng combined the two texts in 








[ 868 ] 3. A. 5 Alchemy 



3. A. 5 Alchemy [ 869 ] 





***** 



U-# ijh * 
t 

Jiti ® if 
— * A* 4 
^£4 ^ 




■*■ -S- 



*■ * 




figure 31. Instructions for making and loading alchemical vessels ( 914 3b-4a). Ming 
reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/907) 



Chunyang Lit zhenren yaoshi zhi 
11 fols. 

Attributed to Lu Dongbin B i1 s l U , hao Chunyang zhenren MI^R A; 
fourteenth or fifteenth century 
903 (fasc. 588) 

“Zhenren Lii Chunyang’s [Poems] on the Preparation ofMineral and Plant Drugs.” 
According to a study based on an analysis of the rhymes and a comparison of plant 
names with those of the Bencao these poems can be dated between 1324 and the 
beginning of the fifteenth century (see Ho Peng Yoke et al., “Elixir plants”). 

The work comprises a series of poems about plants used by alchemists for elixirs or 
aurifaction, and about their action on minerals. The title of each poem is the esoteric 
name of a plant, to which the suffix longya (dragon shoot) is appended. The 
common name of the plant is added in a note after the tide. The exact date of the 
poems is uncertain, but the text employs a number of plant names unusual in Song 
pharmacopoeia. Another work on longya preserved in the Daozang is unfortunately 
also undated (see 929 Xuanyuan huangdi shuijmg yaofa ioa-i2b). 

The text, in its present form, comprises sixty-eight poems on sixty-six plants. Since 
the last poem mentions seventy-two longya cao ftsf Jp[ (na), it is possible that some 
poems have been lost. One poem is incomplete and another is missing on page 7b. 



one book and gave it the present tide. Jinhua chongbi danshi ifelili+UfJil was the 
name of Peng Si’s hermitage (preface, 4b). 

Meng Xu’s story is suspect, both with regard to the transmission and to the date of 
he text. He claims, for instance, that he was unable to put the alchemical instructions 
into practice because of the Wu Xi (read B# for Df ) rebellion. Wu Xi was be- 
headed in 1214, whereas Meng met Lan Yuanbo, an avatar of Bo Yuchan (preface), 
in 1220. Moreover, the latter’s hao is given as Yangsu zhenren A tR A , which was the 

hao of a famous Taoist who lived during the reign of Emperor Renzong (1022-1063) : 
Lan M (var. (I® ) Yuandao AM or Lan Fang H (cf. LZTT 48.18b). Lan Yuandao is 
often mentioned in alchemical books of the thirteenth century or later (cf. 953 Gengdao 
]i i.9a-9b and 243 Tuqi zi danjing zhiyao , preface ia-ib). 

The first juan, ascribed to Bo Yuchan, is short (four folios). It comprises mainly 
poems and a few alchemical prescriptions. The second juan, attributed to Lan Yuanbo, 
consists of detailed instructions for the fabrication of various alchemical elixirs, one 
of these being the Nine-Times-Transmuted Elixir ( jiuzhuan huandan AfliSfl - )- The 
importance of the work lies in its descriptions and manifold diagrams of alchemical 
utensils (fig. 31; cf. Ho and Needham, “Theories of categories,” 57). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ho Peng Yoke et al., “Elixir plants.” 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Shangqing jing zhendan bijue _L fit I? R f 5 } Vlt afe 

6 fols. 

845 (fasc. 573) 

“Secret Instructions for the Tme Elixir according to the Shangqing Scriptures.” This 
work transmits the alchemical skills of the Earth Immortals for saving people from 
poverty and distress, achieving immortality, and obtaining relief from illness (ia-ib). 

First the text fists ten names of pills and describes their application together with 
the maladies they were intended to cure. The text then explains the technical proce- 
dures for concocting the medicines. The basic essences have to be heated and boiled 
for different periods of time and also with varying degrees of intensity. The essences 
are to be enclosed in a vessel called Hunan hezi (#} jA cq ■ The use of a water-fire stove 

(shuihuo lu yjc A M ) is prescribed . It has to be fired with specified amounts of fuel . The 
production of the different medicines took three to nine years. 

Florian C. Reiter 





[ 870 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3. A. 6 Sacred History and Geography 
3.A.6.a Sacred Histories and Records 

The works presented below are grouped into four subcategories: Laozi annals, the 
pantheon, imperial patronage, and sacred geography. 

The long-standing tradition of Laozi annals (see part i.A.6.a and part 2.A.6.a) is 
represented here by two compilations, 774 Toulong zhuan and 770 Hunyuan shengji , of 
the Northern (960-1127) and Southern Song (1127-1279) periods, respectively. The 
detailed narrative iconography of the Laozi visions already found in S93 Lidai chongdao 
ji and further developed in these two works gave rise to illustrated chronicles under 
the Song and Yuan (1279-1368), for example, the controversial Laozi bashiyi hua tu ^ 
-?A-f — "fbO (thirteenth century; see Kenneth Ch’en, “Buddhist-Taoist mixtures”; 
Kubo Noritada, “ Rdshi hachijuichi ka zusetsu”). While many of these chronicles genu- 
inely reflea the imperial patronage of Taoism in various ages, their partisan agenda 
is undeniable: they give prominence to the Taoist creation myth and dwell on the 
claim that from the Three Sovereigns to the “uncrowned king” Confucius, every sage 
of Chinese antiquity enjoyed the benefit of Laozi’s instruction. Even the Buddha 
Sakyamuni owed his enlightenment to Laozi, whose conversion of the barbarians 
accounted for the spread of Buddhism in foreign lands and its ill-advised importation 
to China. The political implications of Laozi’s guidance of emperors from the Han 
Han (206 b.c.-a.d. 220) to the Song were no less contentious. The very tides of 
works such as “Annals of the Sage” (shengji 1 e? IE ) or “Veritable Records” ( shilu If IK), 
with their echoes of dynastic historiography, gave offense in non-Taoist quarters. Xie 
Shouhao’s claim in the preface to his “Annals of the Sage” ( 770 Hunyuan shengji) 
to have based himself on extensive consultation of the records of the Three Teachings 
(. sanjiao no doubt has to be read in this light. 

The comprehensive “Illustrated Pantheon of the Three Spheres” (iss Sancai dingwei 
tu) is followed by three works devoted to the gods of important mountain cults: the 
Envoy of Lushan ( 1286 Lushan Taiping xingguo gong Caifang zhenjun shishi) , the Three 
Brothers of Maoshan (172 San Mao zhenjun jiafeng shidian), and the Three True Lords 
of Mount Huagai (778 Huagai shan Fuqiu Wang Guo san zhenjun shishi). Various 
aspeas of imperial patronage of Taoism under the Song and Ming (1368-1644) are 
illustrated by the next three texts: In 128s Tisheng baode zhuan , the statesman Wang 
Qinruo reveals how the Northern Song had placed itself under the proteaion of a 
Taoist saint whose intervention in the imperial succession engendered the “announce- 
ment from Heaven” incident; 777 Zhangxian mingsu huanghou shou shangqing bifa lu 
ji documents the ceremonies for the Taoist ordination of the dowager of Emperor 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 871 ] 



Zhenzong in 1024; and 1462 Huang Ming enming shilu is a chronologically arranged 
dossier of official documents pertaining to imperial patronage of Taoism under the 
Ming. The section closes with the 1063 Dongyuan ji, the comprehensive sacred geog- 
raphy of modern Taoism. 

Toulong zhuan ft r! fW 

6 juan 

By JiA Shanxiang pj H IM , zi Hongju $t % jk,hao Chongde wuzhen dashi sfHfl 

Iff ; compiled between 1086-1100 

774 (fasc. 555) 

“Biography of [Unfathomable] Like a Dragon.” The title refers to Laozi, alluding 
to Confucius’s charaaerization of the Old Master after the legendary meeting between 
the two sages (see Shiji 63.2140 and the preface to the present work, 6b-7a). A Ming 
(1368-1644) manuscript version of this work preserved in the Library of Congress 
bears the title Taishang hunyuan shangde huangdi youlong zhuan 

in two juan (see Wang Zhongmin, Zhongguo shanben shu tiyao , 411). The 
text’s original arrangement seems to have been in three juan (see the entries in Song 
bibliographies listed in VDL 143). 

Jia Shanxiang, according to his biography in LZTT 5i.i5b-i6a, compiled the 
Toulong zhuan under die Northern Song reign of Zhezong (1086-1100). His official 
titles under the chapter headings indicate that the author was a prelate (jiaomen gong- 
shi A¥), with supervisory authority over one half of the capital’s Taoist clergy. 
Jia is also the author of a phonetic gloss on the Zhuangzi (739 Nanhua zhenjing zhiyin ), 
an ordination ritual for monks (1236 Taishang chujia chuanduyi), and the hagiographic 
compilation Lives of Eminent Taoists ( Gaodao zhuan iUlMfil), which survives only in 
citations (see Yan Yiping, Daojiao yanjiu ziliao 1.4:1-120). 

The long preface to the present work (7 fols.) resumes the main themes of the Laozi 
legend, from several distinct perspectives: (1) Laozi’s sacred appellations and the main 
phases of the “historical” sage’s career (miraculous birth, office of archivist, departure 
to the west, discipleship of Yin Xi AH , return to Qingyang si ascension on a 

white deer); (2) his revelations operated through Yin Xi, Heshang gong, Gan Ji -p 
cf (or Yu Ji A cj), Zhang Daoling 5 S if? It , and Kou Qianzhi; (3) cosmogony and 
scriptural revelation; (4) Laozi’s role as instructor of the mythical rulers ( dishi ^® 5 ) 
from FuXi to the Shang period (ca. 1500-1050 B.c.); and (5) imperial patronage 
of the Laozi cult under the Tang (618-907) and early Song (960-1279) dynasties. 

The Toulong zhuan is the principal Northern Song specimen of a long tradition of 
Laozi hagiography that had received a fresh impetus from the imperial cult of Laozi 
under the Tang. Since Yin Wencao’s now lost Xuanyuan huangdi shengji \jing ] 



1 



[ 872 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 873 ] 



S [fl] in ten juan (see VDL 97 and the surviving fragment in YJQQ 
i02.ia-6a; cf. also the article on 9 S 4 Taishang hunyuan zhenlu), the story of Lord Lao 
as cosmic deity and savior at critical junctures of human history was typically narrated 
in chronicle form, resembling the annals of imperial reigns. The extensive compila- 
tions of Du Guangting at the end of the Tang (especially S93 Lidai chongdao ji, 72s 
Dcwde zhenjing guangsheng yi 2, and presumably the now lost Hunyuan tu WLlLW in 
ten juan) provided much of J ia Shanxiang’s material concerning the Tang period. 
For Southern Song (1127-1279) continuations of this tradition, see the work of Xie 
Shouhao, especially 770 Hunyuan shengji. 

The main body of the present work develops and expands the themes introduced in 
the preface: cosmogony (Laozi, coeternal with the Tao, as originator of both creation 
and revelation); Laozi as teacher of mythical rulers; the birth of Laozi (with distinct 
echoes of the birth legend of Buddha Sakyamuni); the sage’s journey to the west, the 
discipleship of Yin Xi, scriptural revelations; the new dispensation entrusted to Laozi’s 
second disciple and vicar, Zhang Daoling; and Laozi’s numerous interventions on 
behalf of the Tang ruling house. The last entry concerns Laozi’s renewed canonization 
by the Northern Song emperor Zhenzong (r. 997-1022). 

Fmnciscus Verellen 

Hunyuan shengji jt S 1 C 

9 juan 

By Xie Shouhao Iff yf iff, zi Huaiying hao Guanfu dashi 

preface by Chen Fuliang Pllflf (dated 1193); author’s presentation memorial 

(dated 1191). 

770 (fasc. 551-53) 

“Annals of the Sage of Undifferentiated Beginning [i.e., Laozi].” According to 
Xie’s presentation memorial ( jinbiao iftlS) as reproduced here, the original work 
comprised eleven juan and was submitted to the emperor (Guangzong, r. 1189-1194) 
under the title Taishang laojun hunyuan shengji (prefaces, 3a-b). 

In fact, however, the original title was Taishang laojun hunyuan [ shangde ] huangdishilu 
js. _h ^ ft (S TC [ilfS] JH'Sfflflt (see 297 Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian xubian 5.7b). 

Two Ming (1368-1644) manuscripts bearing that title are preserved in the Peking 
Library and the Library of Congress: the Taishang laojun hunyuan shangde huangdi 
shilu in seven juan (see Beijing tushu guan shanben bu ed., Beijing tushu guan shanben 
shumu 5.31a; 297 Tongjian xubian also indicates a work in seven juan) and in six juan 
(see Wang Zhongmin, Zhongguo shanben shu tiyao, 411). The Peking manuscript is 
reproduced in Zangwai daoshu 18:1-208, where the tide is abridged as Taishang laojun 
shilu IfH, or “Veritable Record of the Most High Lord Lao.” This text 

represents a separate line of transmission of the present work. In the Peking manu- 



script, the preface by Chen Fuliang (1137-1203) and Xie’s presentation memorial both 
read shilu JOt in the place of shengji i=|£, and the memorial reads “a certain number 
of juan” instead of “eleven juan.” The contents of the present work and the Peking 
manuscript are essentially the same but show traces of revision, as does the chapter 
arrangement: Shengji juan 3-4 correspond to Shilu 3, Shengji 5-6 to Shilu 4, and Shengji 
7-9 to Shilu 5-7. The Peking manuscript edition features four additional prefaces and a 
colophon, including prefaces by Zhu Xi’s (1130-1200) disciple Cai Yuanding H 
TCaE: (1135-1198) and by Xie E Hf sf (1121-1194), ajinshi (f| f: of the Shaoxing period 
(1131-1162) and a high-ranking Southern Song (1127-1279) official. The latter’s preface 
is dated 1190 (Shilu, prefaces 10b; Zangwai daoshu 18:5), that is, the year before the 
work’s official presentation. 

The Taishang shilu jfc _fc.1t IS by Xie Shouhao is mentioned among new works 
included in the edition of the Daozang completed in 1244 (VDL 56). Xiang Mai’s ££ 
ill (fl. 1281 - 1291 ) Bianwei lu 2 . 764 b lists the title Hunyuan huangdi shilu i'S Tt jH 'Sr Iff 

(as well as a Taishang shilu by Xie Shouhao) among the Taoist books proscribed 
by Kublai Khan in 1281. The colophon by Ke Zhengmeng M IE SI to the Peking manu- 
script, meanwhile, dates to the Zhizheng (1341-1368) period at the end of the Yuan 
(. Zangwai daoshu 18:208). 

A textual comparison of the two versions and an examination of the prefaces and 
colophon suggest that the Hunyuan shengji text constitutes a post-Song revision of 
Xie Shouhao’s work. The Taishang laojun shilu version, on the other hand, not only 
preserves the original title but also represents the earlier phase in the text’s elabora- 
tion and transmission. References in the Shilu version to “the present dynasty,” for 
example, have been changed in the present text to “the Song dynasty.” Also some of the 
anti-Buddhist material in the Shilu version that was connected with the Huahu 
legend— Xie cites the statesman Wang Qinruo’s (962-1125) defense of his inclusion 
of the Laozi huahu jing ^ ~p ft fiH fl in the Northern Song (960-1127) canon ( Shilu 
7.47b; Shengji 9.33b)— has been purged from the present text, perhaps with a view to 
the work’s reintegration into the canon following the Yuan (1279-1368) proscription. 
The shilu titles listed by Xiang Mai suggest that the book had indeed been banned in 
that form. After fortuitously surviving the book burnings of 1281, the Shilu presum- 
ably served as the basis for the Peking manuscript copy made under the Ming (cf. Shi 
Yanfeng, “ Hunyuan shengji”). 

For separate, partial versions of the present work transmitted within the Daozang, 
see 771 Taishang laojun nianpu yaolue and 773 Taishang hunyuan laozi shiliie. 

A brief introduction at the head of juan 1 lists the classical authors of die Laozi leg- 
end, beginning with Sima Qian (referring to Laozi’s biography in Shiji 63), and points 
to the present work’s immediate predecessors, the first of which was Yin Wencao’s 
Shengji I=?fE, that is, the now lost early Tang (618-907) Xuanyuan huangdi shengji 




[ 874 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 87s ]' 



[jing] A tcM 'Sr 1 = 1 C [IM ] in ten juan (see VDL 97). Of this only a fragment survives 
in YJQQ i02.ia-6a, titled Hunyuan huangdi shengji ; Xie’s subsequent citations of the 
“Tang Annals” (Tangji /U#E) refer to this work (on 954 Taishang hunyuan zhenlu as a 
source for the present compilation, see Kusuyama, “ Taisho kongen shinroku kb” 459- 
60). The second predecessor to the present work was Jia Shanxiang’s Northern 
Song 774 Toulong zhuan , a compilation that Xie Shouhao denigrates as abundant 
but confused (1.1b). In the remainder of juan 1, Xie presents a summary of his own 
wide-ranging research in the form of a chronicle ( nianpu ^ la ) of Laozi’s manifesta- 
tions from the mythical era of the Three Sovereigns down to his apparition in 1112 
under the Northern Song emperor Huizong (i.2a-4ia). 

Xie Shouhao’s annals cite a broad range of sources, including scripture, hagiog- 
raphy, standard historiography, inscriptions, and Buddhist and Confucian writings, as 
well as such recent compilations as the anthology Taiping guangji and, in connection 
with repeated references to Laozi’s return and ascension at Black Sheep Market, Yue 
Penggui’s ^ fJJJ jH 964 Xichuan Qingyang gong helming. Not mentioned are the works 
of Du Guangting, although the latter’s S93 Lidai chongdaoji and S90 Daojiao lingyan 
ji , for example, furnished virtually all of Xie’s material relating to the period from the 
mid-ninth to the early tenth century ( Hunyuan shengji 9.i5b-24a; see Verellen, “A 
forgotten T’ang restoration,” 114-15), in addition to numerous earlier passages. The 
extent to which the present work might incorporate Du’s now lost Hunyuan tu (H ft 
(S| in ten juan is impossible to determine. 

The development of the work’s main contents follows approximately the scheme 
laid out in the nianpu chronology in juan 1. Juan 2 describes Laozi’s creation of the uni- 
verse and his revelations addressed to Fu Xi {Ifg and subsequent culture heroes and 
mythical rulers; juan 3-4 cover Laozi’s manifestations under the Shang (ca. 1500-1050 
b.c.) and Zhou (ca. 1050-221 b.c.), and his revelations to Yin Xi HU; juan 5, con- 
tinues with Yin Xi’s discipleship and covers the conversion of the Western Barbarians 
( Huahu ); juan 6 tells of other disciples, including Wenzi and Gengsang chu Jjl 

lit, of instructions imparted to Confucius, and covers the Qin dynasty; juan 7 contains 
advice to Han emperors, further revelations dirough the intermediaries of Heshang 
gong and Zhang Daoling Jit HI, and information on the Wei, Northern Wei, and 
Kou Qianzhi; juan 8 covers the Northern Zhou, Sui, and early Tang (emperors 
Gaozu to Xuanzong); juan 9 continues to discuss the Tang (Xuanzong through Xi- 
zong to the final years of the dynasty), as well as the Five Dynasties and Northern 
Song emperors down to Huizong. The final entries concern Huizong’s Xuanhe reign 
period (1119-1125). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Shi Yanfeng, “'Hunyuan shengji yu Taishang laojun shiluV 

Franciscus Verellen 



Taishang laojun nianpu yaoliie A h IS H A- ph® 

13 fols. 

Compiled by Xie Shouhao Ht vFi§! (1134-1212); revised by Li Zhidao 
ofYinshan HI ill 
771 (fasc. 554) 

“Summary Chronicle of Most High Lord Lao.” This work is a separate edition of 
the concise Laozi chronicle ( nianpu HIb) included in juan 1 of Xie Shouhao’s 
extensive “Annals of the Sage” (770 Hunyuan shengji 1.1b ff.). The present, revised edi- 
tion is clearly and conveniently set out under the reigns of the mythical and historical 
rulers who were instructed by Laozi or favored by manifestations of the sage. A similar 
arrangement of the same material appears in the first chapter of 773 Taishang hunyuan 
laozi shiliie. 

Franciscus Verellen 

Taishang hunyuan Laozi shiliie A _tl 7 t IS IP 
3 juan 

By Xie Shouhao Hfyf H (1134-1212) 

773 (fasc. 554) 

“Short History of Laozi, Most High of Undifferentiated Beginning.” This is a 
truncated version of Xie Shouhao’s “Annals of the Sage” (770 Hunyuan shengji). 
The author is here identified as Xie Shouhao of the Qingxu an 'MlM M sanctuary 
on Lushan IfM ill • Juan 1 of the present work is another version of the Laozi chronicle 
(nianpu ) in 770 Hunyuan shengji 1; the arrangement here resembles that found 
in 771 Taishang laojun nianpu yaoliie. The remaining chapters cover approximately the 
portion of the narrative contained in 770 Hunyuan shengji 2-4, ending with an account 
of the discipleship of Yin Xi H H . 

Franciscus Verellen 

Sancai dingwei tu H 

8 + 11 fols. 

By Zhang Shangying jM® 5 ?,ziTianjue ji%,hao Wujin jushi 
(1043-1121) 

155 (fasc. 68) 

“Illustrated Pantheon of the Three Spheres.” This text was composed by the states- 
man and liturgist Zhang Shangying, probably on imperial order. According to 
the annotated table of contents (pianmu H g ; ia-8b), the original text served as a 
guide to the entire scope of the universe, from the highest sphere of the primordial 
Void Sovereigns (xuhuang 1 $ J[), to the Heavens of the Three Pures Ones (sanqing 
tian H '/if jz ), to the deities of the cosmic energies of the Eight Trigrams ( bagua AH) 




[ 876 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 877 ] 




figure 32. Yuhuang and the Thirty-two Heavens (iss iob-nb) 

and all their derivatives, to the Heaven of Yuhuang 5 ^, the Three Officials (sanguan 
zL liT ), the stars of the Dipper, the Twenty-eight Stellar Mansions, and the Six Palaces 
of Hell (Fengdu liugong \ ceT). 

Only part of the illustrations that correspond to this great pantheon have survived: 
those of the Void Sovereigns, the Three Pure Ones, and the Heaven of Yuhuang (fig. 
32). An obviously misplaced and incomplete picture of the Controller of Fate (Jiutian 
siming W] ), Heavenly Worthy of the Protection of Life (Baosheng tianzun fljc 
A^H), has been inserted between the second and the third of the Three Pure Ones 
(see fig. 33). 

It is highly probable that the illustrations at the beginning of is6 Shangqing dong- 
zhen jiugong zifang tu (ia-4a) also belonged originally to our text. They represent 




figure 33. The Controller of Fate, Jiutian siming (iss 6b-7a) 



two of the Three Officials, the Gates of Heaven (erge Zll®), the stars of the Dipper 
and of the Twenty-eight Mansions, and other stellar deities. The legends show many 
similarities with those of the present work. 

In spite of its lacunal state, this remains a precious document on early Song (960- 
1279) theology. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Lushun Taiping xingguo gong Caifang zhenjun shishi 

7 juan 

First compiled by Ye Yiwen (preface 1154), with many later additions 

1286 (fasc. 1006-1007) 

“Veritable Facts Concerning the Tme Lord Investigator of the Taiping Xingguo 
Temple on Mount Lu.” This is a collection of texts and documents concerning the 
tutelary deity of Lushan, the holy mountain (near Jiujiang A f t , Jiangxi). Since 
ancient times, the worship of the Envoy of Lushan (Lushan shizhe fSlIlfKA) has 
been recognized as part of the worship of the Five Sacred Peaks and other major holy 
mountains, the latter having the function of assisting the gods of the former (see 1281 
Wuyue zhenxing xulun 24b). In 731, on die order of Emperor Xuanzong (r. 712-756), 
these holy mountains were endowed with temples dedicated to their respective tute- 
lary deities (see Zizhi tongjian 213.6796). The inscription “Jiutian shizhe miaobei A 
Hflfi?” by Li Pin ^Ijt commemorates this fact and is preserved in the present 
work on 6.ia-5b; it is dated 732 and appears to be genuine (see the authentification 
dated 1241 in the colophon by Cheng Gongxu fUlS HA 6.5b-8a). 

This imperial patronage continued under the Song, when, especially under Taizong 
(r. 976-997) and Zhenzong (r. 997-1023), the Five Sacred Peaks and connected sites 
played again an important role in the dynastic legitimation process. In 977 the temple 
on Lushan received the official name of Taiping xingguo gong, in keeping with the 
reign tide of that period. 

The present work was compiled much later, it seems from the preface, by a local of- 
fical named Ye Yiwen (1098-1170). Ye relates that when he went to the temple 

in 1154, together with the prefect of Jiujiang, to perform the official sacrifices, he was 
appaoched by a local daoshi who asked him to compile a record on the tutelary deity 
from the temple records. 

It is uncertain, however, to what extent the present work reflects Ye’s original text. 
Indeed, in the above-mentioned colophon by Cheng Gongxu, it says that the Tang 
inscription was originally included in the work compiled by Ye Yiwen, but that its tide 
was Ganyingji if® Iff A • On the other hand, in a memorial dated 1238 and addressed 
to the throne, the temple’s abbot, Xiong Shouzhong yf A , requests an upgrading 



[ 878 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



of the canonical title of the deity (2.i2b-i4a). As part of his request, Xiong mentioned 
the legend that at the time the Tang temple was built the divine Envoy appeared to 
Emperor Xuanzong in a dream and prophesied that after 500 years he would gready 
help the empire. That time had now arrived. Xiong also added a book he had compiled 
of the miracles performed by the Envoy during the Song dynasty. He states that his 
book was in six chapters, and he gives their tides. Several of these udes correspond to 
those of the chapters included in the present text, and there is every reason to suppose 
that these are indeed Xiong’s work. 

As a result of Xiong Shouzhong’s efforts, the status of the deity was raised in 1240, 
and the official documents issued on that occasion are also included here (3.ia-3b). 
Other documents concerning the deity and its worship are dated even later, the last 
one being from the year 1318. The title of chapter 4, “Yuanchao chongfeng lei 76 
zk ^ refers to the Yuan dynasty, suggesting that the present work was completed 
only under the Ming dynasty. 

The work is rich in materials unknown elsewhere. There is a poem by Zhu Xi 7^ M 
(1130-1200) on 5.10a, commemorating his discussions on Inner Alchemy with a daoshi 
of the temple (compare 1001 Zhouyi cantong qi ). Bo Yuchan (fl. 1218) is featured with 
a commemoration of his stay at the temple (6.i9b-25a; cf. 1309 Haiqiong chuandaoji) 
and with a long poem (6.25b-26b). The work also documents the visit by the court 
Taoist Zhang Liusun (see 304 Maoshan zhi) as a special envoy of the empress 

and the heir apparent to present an Offering ( jiao §|) for the health of the emperor. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Reiter, “The ‘Investigation Commissioner of the Nine Heavens’” 

Tuan Bingling 

San Mao zhenjun jiafeng shidian H ^ ® ^ /JTI Tt ^ 1 ft 

2 juan 

Compiled and edited by Zhang Dachun hao Chongjing mingzhen 

weimiao dashi 1267 

172 (fasc. 75) 

“Protocol of the Additional Canonization of the Mao Brothers.” The official grant- 
ing of the additional tides shengyou Wjfc (for Mao Ying deyou (for Mao 

Gu WW\), and renyou (for Mao Zhong in 1249 was inspired by Shi Tan 
hao Dongwei xiansheng j|§I (7$ yt (fe , who made his own promotion to Taoist 
registrar in the capital ( zuojie daolu tsL'iUMM) contingent upon that of the deities. 

Zhang Dachun supervised the affairs of all monasteries on Maoshan ^ |JL| and was 
the head of Shi Tan’s home monastery, Chongxi guan which was to receive 

a generous donation on the occasion of the ceremony. Zhang recorded the complete 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 879 ] 



procedural details of the official act. The printing of this documentation at Shi Tan’s 
request took place only in 1267, after his death (preface). 

Juan 1 of our text contains the document of Shi’s appointment as zuojie daolu and 
and a record of the ensuing negotiations between the master and the authorities. The 
final imperial edict for the canonization of the deities is found on I.i4b-i7b (see also 
304 Maoshan zhi 4.i3b-i5a). Messages of salutation to the saints conclude juan 1. 

Juan 2 comprises two rituals in honor of the ancestors of Maoshan, the first being a 
later addition, since it speaks of the additional titles zhenying (ft f® , miaoyingpj/M, and 
shenying which were bestowed on the Mao brothers only in 1316 (cf. 304 Maoshan 
zhi 4.i9a-2ia). This ritual is followed by die official ritual for die present canonization 
and, among others, an address (qingci |S] ) by the emperor himself. The work ends 
with Shi Tan’s letter of thanks to the court and his request to have die imperial edict 
carved on a stele. 

Ursula-Angdika Cedzich 

Huagai shan Fuqiu Wang Guo san zhenjun shishi 
6 juan 

Compiled in 1261 by Liu Xiang and Wang Kerning ZEjSHfl, from writings 
by Zhang Yuanshu ijl TtflS (fl. 1180), Huang Mijian ff H, and others (twelfth 
through fourteenth centuries); revised edition of 1407 
778 (fasc. 556-557) 

“Factual Account of the Three True Lords of Mount Huagai: Fuqiu, Wang, and 
Guo.” This work contains the remnants of documents concerning the cult of the lords 
of the mountain situated south of Nanchang in Jiangxi province. The original work 
comprised fourteen juan. It had been compiled in 1261 by Liu Xiang and Wang Ke- 
rning, who based their work on records written by Huang Mijian, as well as on their 
own efforts. They explicidy did not attempt to eliminate contradictory evidence. In 
1352, the printing blocks of their edition were destroyed by war. Around 1391, Jiang 
Bicheng d If W. made great efforts to revive the cult of the Three Lords. He suc- 
ceeded in collecting materials for a new hagiography. In 1407 Zhang Yuchu revised 
these new documents and incorporated them into the collection of Taoist texts that 
he was preparing by imperial order. The above information is provided by the three 
prefaces. 

Fuqiu fn is a legendary figure. He was the teacher of Wang 3 E and Guo ?| 5 , who 

hailed from Kaifengfii (Henan). A text of unknown origin within the commentary (2.1b) 
states that the two disciples, here named Daoxiang Mi® and Daoyi MS, were in fact 
legendary figures like their teacher. They are said to have set out in search of a particular 
mountain in Jiangnan, where they hoped to find their teacher once again. They finally 



[ 88o ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 881 ] 



reached Mount Huagai where they performed many miraculous deeds, healed 
the sick, and provided assistance to the needy. In 293 they ascended to Heaven. 

The first chapter contains historic miscellanea, for example, an inscription (i.5a-7a) 
by Yan Zhenqing M !lt IIP (709-785) and the text Sanzhenji H M IS by Li Chongyuan 
dated 1099 (i.7a-9b). The indication of die name Shen Tingrui (d. 

985) as author of this first chapter is surely erroneous. Shen Tingrui is the author of 
the Er zhenjun shilu — H Hf (2.ia-na). 

The text itself, like the commentaries by the two compilers of the Song period (Liu 
and Wang), describes the journey of Wang and Guo to Mount Huagai, referring to the 
many places in central Jiangxi where they had become objects of local veneration. Liu 
Xiang and Wang Kerning are responsible for the listing of the honorary titles, which 
were bestowed on the Three Lords by imperial decrees dated 1075, 1099, 1117, and 1237. 
Zhang Yuanshu 7c f [I (fl. 1180) was the author of a mountain gazetteer (see 3.1a flf.), 

for which he used older sources (Yan Zhenqing, Shen Tingrui). The indication of the 
year 1265 (3.7b) has been added by the two compilers of the Song period (the same 
applies to 6.14a). They are also responsible for the compilation of juan 4, containing 
a description of temples of the cult, and for juan 5 and 6. These two chapters contain 
biographies and tales about miraculous events that are due to the beneficial influences 
of Wang and Guo. Among the biographies, two texts should be especially mentioned: 
Shen Tingrui’s biography (he was a substantial contributor to this work) and Rao 
Dongtian’s biography (he was the founder of the Tianxin zhengfa on 

Mount Huagai). The foundation of the Tianxin zhengfa is said to have been due to 
the inspiration of the Three Lords of Mount Huagai. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Hymes, Way and byway, 277-80; Reiter, Grundelemente , 108-11. 

Flavian C. Reiter 

Tishen g baode zhuan £0 li! ft? 

3 juan 

By Wang Qinruo 1016 

1285 (fasc. 1006) 

“Biography of [the True Lord] Assisting the Sage and Protecting Virtue.” This is a 
comprehensive account of the revelations made in the period 960-994 by the divine 
protector of the Song dynasty, the True Lord Yisheng baode ® H ftf . 

The book was compiled by the commissioner for the Palace Secretariat (shumi shi 
tiiSjffi) Wang Qinruo (962-1125) on the basis of earlier records. It was presented 
at court in 1016 (the presentation memorial and endorsement are appended) and fur- 
nished with a preface by Emperor Zhenzong (r. 997-1022). The earliest edition of the 
work is found in YJQQ 103. The present edition differs by attributing Zhenzong’s 



preface to Renzong (r. 1022—1063), and by including at the end the enfeoffment of 
Yisheng by Huizong (r. 1100-1125) in 1104. The book is described in the Siku quanshu 
zongmu tiyao 147.3074-75, which criticizes the Taoist policies of Wang Qinruo and 
confuses the subject of the book with the deity Xuanwu. 

The revelations took place at Zhongnan shan, where the god had spoken through 
Zhang Shouzhen HtF jj|, a man from Zhouzhi MM county (north of the mountain 
and bordering on the prefecture of Chang’an). It appears from some early accounts 
(Xu Zizhi tongjian changbian 17.14b and Shiwujiyuan 2.22a-b) that the god had origi- 
nally presented himself as the Black Killer General (Heisha jiangjun JiK }f\f 5 a 
name that is absent from the present book. The Shiwujiyuan quotes from the Tang Ti 
tanyuan $§(ti£^E, on which the account in the Changbian is also partly based. Prior 
to the revelations, the Black Killer had been worshiped in the 930s by Tan Zixiao, 
the founder of the Tianxin zhengfa Ti'L'IEfi; (cf. Ma Ling’s Nan Tang shu 24.162). 
The Black Killer talisman (“Heisha fu ® =&ft”) is one of the three fundamental fu of 
the Tianxin zhengfa and was probably already known to Tan Zixiao (see .06 Shang- 
qing tianxin zhengfa). 

The importance attached to these revelations under the Northern Song is due to 
the fact that they included an announcement from Heaven ( fuming ffiop) that the 
mandate was to be transferred toTaizong (r. 976-997)-. the younger brother of the first 
emperor, Taizu (r. 960-976). The key sentence is, “The prince of Jin [i.e., Taizong] has 
a virtuous heart WIWt'L'” (1.5b). This revelation is said to have taken place on the 
night before the death ofTaizu in 976 ( Changbian 17.14b). It is, however, also said that 
Taizong took an interest in the cult already in the years 963-967 (i-4-a), and it seems 
likely that the announcement played a role in securing his position as the heir apparent. 
After the accession of Taizong, the god was rewarded by the construction of the Shang- 
qing taiping gong f, (rf f\ "T* temple, which was completed in 980 at the place where 

Zhang Shouzhen received his revelations (i.6b-7b; see also Changbian i8.i2b-i3a and 
the inscription by Xu Xuan WM in Xugong wenji 25-4b-8a). The god was canonized 
as General Yisheng in 981 (1.8b) and as True Lord Yisheng baode in 1014 (1.10b). 

The main elements of the initial revelation were the methods of the sword, ijianfa 
01] 1.2b— 3a) and a system of jiao H services comprising a new nomenclature for 

the various kinds of jiao and regulations for the numbers of places for deities ( shenwei 
|${ 5 ) on the altar (i.3a-4a). This system was later adopted as the imperial standard 
(see 477 Luotian dajiao zaochao ke, 478 Luotian dajiao wuchao ke, and 479 Laotian dajiao 
wanchao ke). A resume of the book (based also on additional sources) is included in 
Songchao shishi 7.i2a-2ib. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Soymie, “Etude du Yisheng baode zhuan ” ; Yang Huarong, “ Yisheng baode zhuan jieshao.” 

Foul Andersen 




[ 882 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 

Zhangxian mingsu huanghou sbou shangqing bifa lu ji 

5 fols. 

By Zhu Ziying f=} H, hao Guanmiao xiansheng 1024 

777 (fasc. 556) 

Records of Empress Zhangxian Mingsu’s Initiation into the Highest Registers of 
die Shangqing Tradidon.” These records were compiled by Zhu Ziying in 1024, that 
is, shortly after the mourning period for the Song emperor Zhenzong (r. 997-1022) 
had ended, on the occasion of the official Taoist ordination of the empress dowager. 
The ceremonies, prepared at the Yuqing zhaoying gong 5 if HSffig temple in the 
capital, took place at the Chongxi guan ^ jgig on Maoshan ^ |_[j and comprised a 
seven-day ordination ritual ( yulu daochang 5 SI ill i§), a three-day thanksgiving ritual 
( xieen dcwchang that included a Retreat banquet (zhai ) for the entire 

clergy of Maoshan, and a ritual of casting dragon tablets ( tousong jinlong yujian fix 
Zhu Ziying (976—1029), the twenty-third Maoshan patriarch and, 
simultaneously, the head of the Yuqing zhaoying gong in the capital (see 304 Maoshan 
zhi 11. iob-nb) officiated as master of ordination ( dushi fg ), while Zhang Shaoying 
{sec 304 Maoshan zhi i6.ib-2a) acted as a guarantor (baoju fifilg). In acknowl- 
edgment of their services, the two masters received the honorary names Guanmiao 
xiansheng H %!> (fe and Mingzhen xiansheng t£j 0 | % £ , respectively (see “Maoshan 
di ershisan dai shangqing dadong guoshi Qianyuan Guanmiao xiansheng youguang 
xianyangzhi bei + 

304 Maoshan zhi 25.13a). 

A slightly modified version of Zhu’s report was carved in stone by Meng Yingzhi 
ml IM i'Z. (304 Maoshan zhi 25.2a~5a). 

Ursula- Angelika Cedzich 

Huang Ming enming shilu Ifij ® m? fit 

9 juan 

Between 1567 and 1607 

1462 (fasc. 1065) 

“Chronological Register of the Gracious Ordinances of the Illustrious Ming.” 
This work is a compilation of official documents concerning acts of imperial patron- 
age on behalf of the Heavenly Masters of the forty-second through the forty-ninth 
generations. Several documents concerning the Fiftieth Heavenly Master have been 
added-their titles do not appear in the table of contents — at the end of juan 9. The 
year 1567 is the latest date for a document in the original compilation, 1605 for the 
additions. The same documents serve as the basis of the history of these Heavenly 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 883 ] 

Masters in 1463 Han tianshi shijia 3.24a-4.i7b (cf. 3.25a, where the author of the Shijia 
refers to the present text). 

After the first juan, which contains the eulogies of the first twenty generations of 
Heavenly Masters written by the emperor Taizu, each master is accorded a separate 
juan (juan 4 and 5 are partially lost). 

John Lagerwey 

Jin dongtian haiyue biao fit ifif T; ifif JIL 

5 fols. 

Presented in 1050 

1062 (fasc. 732) 

Dongyuan ji 

9 juan 

By Li Sicong ca. 1050 

1063 (fasc. 732) 

The 1063 Dongyuan ji (Anthology of the Abyssal Cavern) is preceded by the 1062 Jin 
dongtian haiyue biao (Memorials for the Presentation of “Cavern-Heavens, Seas, and 
Peaks”), which is a compilation of three official texts: a memorial {biao Jz ), a report 
{zhuang {$), and a letter ( zhafu ifijfif). All of them concern the presentation of an 
anthology of religious topography to the Emperor Song Renzong in 1050. The anthol- 
ogy was authored by the daoshi Li Sicong from the Dazhong xiangfu gong 
IK of Qianzhou fit j‘ 1'1 (modern Ganxian southern Jiangxi). The author relates 
that he had been compiling Taoist classics since 1032 and eventually produced a set of 
six charts, with introductions and poems, describing (1) the Celestial Abodes (' Yuqing 
xuanji tu fiE/ff ffifisfilHI, quoted as Tuxu fig xuanji tu on 2b); (2) the Cavern-Heavens 
and the Five Peaks ( Dongtian wuyue tu M^S^Hl); (3) the Islands of Immortals 
{Penghu langyuan tu JI HIKING HI); (4) the Sacred Water Courses {Darning lingdu tu 
[ftl ); (5) Famous Mountains and Blessed Lands {Mingshanjudi tu ^ ill fig 
H ); (6) the Liquified Gold and cyclically transformed elixir ( Jinyi huandan tujfeitflM 
fl-H). This author also produced ‘Ten Charts for Perusal while Reclining” {Wopi tu 
H )■ The purpose of the two works— the anthology of the six charts presented in 
1050 and the extant 1063 Dongyuan ji— was identical, but the details are different. 1063 
Dongyuan ji does not include the alchemical part but adds the Twenty- four Dioceses 
{zhi (p ) and the stars and heavens (juan 6 to 9). Also, the charts and poems have disap- 
peared, and some parts lack a title; therefore it is possible that the extant 1063 Dongyuan 
ji was collected later, with the remnants of the anthology of religious topography that 
was presented to Emperor Song Renzong in 1050. It is also worth noting that the title 
Dongyuan ji does not figure in the three official documents collected in 1062 Haiyue 



[ 884 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 

biao. The present text should not be confused with the unrelated 1064 Dongyuan ji 
of the same name. The compilation of the 1063 Dongyuan ji in its present state must 
have taken place sometime after 1050; it is quoted less than a century later among the 
sources of 148 Duren shangpin miaojing pangtong tu 3.8. 

In the preface of 1063 Dongyuan ji (“Sanjie yong xu i.ia-b, dated 1050), 

Li Sicong gives yet another list of contents: (1) the abodes of the highest gods, (2) die 
Cavern-Heavens and Five Peaks, and (3) the Islands of Immortals. 

The contents of the “Anthology of the Abyssal Cavern” are arranged topically 
among its nine juan. The first juan contains the preface and the “Sanqing yong xu H 
if (Introduction to Chanting the Three Pure Ones; ib-8a), which describes the 

highest gods and the books and heavens associated with them. Next come the Ten 
Great and Thirty-six Lesser Cavern -Heavens (juan 2), the Five Celestial Peaks (3.1a- 
2b), the Three Islands ( 3 - 3 n 3b), and the Ten Continents (3b— 6a). Juan 4 introduces 
the seventy-two Blessed Places (fudi including the Five Peaks, number 2 to 6), 
and juan 5 names the seas, rivers, lakes, and other water courses (thirty-nine in all). The 
terrestrial geography closes with the Twenty-four Dioceses ( zhi fa ) of the Tianshi dao 
(juan 6). The next two juan deal with astronomy: the eleven bright stars (7.ia-4a), the 
seven gods of the Dipper (7.4b-6b), and the Twenty-eight Stellar Mansions (juan 8). 
Juan 9 introduces the thirty-two gods of the celestial palaces of Shangqing ( Shangqing 
sanshier turn digong shen _h fit cr. A — A "Sf ; ia-jb) and ends with a presentation 

of all heavens (“Juguan sanjie shiji 6a-b). 

The present work is highly systematic. Although its lists conform with traditional 
sacred geography, it differs in many regards from the corresponding chapters in the 
YJQQ (see especially juan 26-28), compiled slightly earlier, and from 399 Dongtian 
fudiyuedu mingshanji. It is generally more detailed than either of these texts, includ- 
ing descriptions of the gods themselves (especially in juan 1 and 7 to 9), but does not 
mention its sources. 

Vincent Goossaert 

3.A.6.b Hagiographies 

This section discusses, first, comprehensive hagiographic collections; second, col- 
lections section figures according to specific schools or lineages; and finally, lives of 
individual immortals or patron saints of particular cults. The texts S96 Xianyuan bian- 
zhu and 1248 Sandong qunxian lu are essentially reference works grouping extracts from 
earlier anthologies in paired entries according to antithetical or matching themes. 
LZTT (296 Lishi zhenxiun tidao tongjian) and its two supplements (297 Lishi zhenxictn 
tidcw tongjian xubitm and 298 Lishi zhenxiun tidao tongjian houji ) represent the most 
ambitious Taoist hagiographic project since Du Guangting’s now lost Xianzhucm 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 88s ] 

shiyi in forty juan (see the general Bibliography for a reconstruction). These texts not 
only are exhaustive in scope, but in effect constitute a history of Taoism, itself seen as 
a succession of schools, cults, and individuals having “embodied the Tao” in differ- 
ent ages. While LZTT combines several different dassificatory objectives, historical 
chronology is the guiding principle in the organization of the 781 Xuanpin lu. Zhao 
Mengfu’s “Portraits of Ten Masters” (163 Xuanyuan shizi tu) is a fine example of the 
genre of illustrated hagiography. Two compilations from the turn of the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, 146s Xiaoyao xu jing and 1476 Soushenji, finally, stand as selective 
hagiographic histories spanning the period from antiquity to the Ming. 

The next set of works is organized around lineages or movements: 1463 Han tianshi 
shijia concerns the “hereditary house” of the Heavenly Masters; 440 Xu taishi zhenjun 
tuzhuan, 447 Xu zhenjun xianzhuan, and 448 Xish an Xu zhenren bashiwu hua lu are all 
based on Bo Yuchan’s hagiography of Xu Xun (the Tulongji UH ) and on other 
saints and patriarchs of the Way of Filial Piety of Xishan 0 [1| . 452 Nanyuejiu zhenren 
zhuan groups together nine immortals of Hengshan '$j [Jj , and 936 Zhongnan shan 
shuojing tai lidai zhenxian beiji gathers eminent Taoists of die Louguan JI M temple 
lineage. 

The final group is devoted to individual saints : 301 Huan zhenren shengxianji to Tao 
Hong jing’s servant Huan zhenren JI R A ; 306 TaihuaXiyi zhi to Chen Tuan ; 4/0 
Taiji Ge xiangong zhuan to Ge Xuan; 431 Yunfu shan Shen xianweng zhuan to Shen 
Taizhi EjJ A ; 779 Tang Ye zhenren zhuan to Ye Fash an; 780 Diqi shangjiang Wen 
taibao zhuan to Wen Qiong ; and 308 Ningyang Dong zhenren yuxianji to Dong 
zhenren MR A- 

Xianyuan bianzhu fill 141 IftSk 

3 juan 

Compiled by Wang Songnian EE J2; A ; tenth century, after 960 

596 (fasc. 329-330) 

“Garden of Immortals: A Pearl Treasury.” The text bears no exact date but refers 
to the year 960 (3.24b). The term bianzhu in the title of the text (literally, “a 
tress of pearls”) indicates the precious nature of the narrative and places the work in 
a specific literary form. The bianzhu belongs to the anthology ( leishu HU) class of 
literature but is itself an expanded form of an older literary genre, the lianzhu 
consisting of very short verses, each word of which encapsulates a historical event or 
legend. The lianzhu were mnemonics learned by rote at school and later paraded in 
literary works. In the course of time, they developed into the bianzhu form, which 
is characterized by short verses followed by a text in prose that elucidates the narra- 
tive hidden in the verse. In his preface, Wang Songnian explains that “in writing the 
‘Garden of Immortals’ in the bianzhu form, I have taken as a basis the Meng Qiu W- 



[ 886 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 887 ] 



, which uses four-character verses to highlight the essentials [of the story] and then 
adds an explanation in the form of a commentary” (preface, ib). The Meng Qiu is a 
Tang (618-907) work by Li Han $$$. Another example of this literary form is the 
Bian Zhu by Du Gongzhan f±:&fl§ of the Sui (581-618). 

Our text groups more than 300 lianzhu in pairs, that is, in eight-word couplets that 
introduce over 600 immortals. Wang Songnian tells us in his preface that for the great- 
er number of these figures he has used well-known sources, like the Shenxian zhuan 
. In addition to these immortals he has included 132 persons who attained im- 
mortality “since Tang and Liang times” (preface, ib). Each lianzhu is accompanied by 
extensive commentaries, written by Wang himself, in which he offers information on 
each immortal. Wang gleaned this information from diverse hagiographies and other 
sources, many of which are now lost: for instance, the Daoxue zhuan (1.2b) 

and the Louguan zhuan HfH (1.7a). 

The importance of this text lies in the fact that because of these references to works 
now lost, it can be used to reconstruct important ancient hagiographies and perhaps 
provide added information regarding familiar texts such as the 1016 Zhen’gao and the 
294 Liexian zhuan. 

Mention is made of this text in the Song shi , “Yiwen zhi” (VDL 95). 

Pauline Bentley Koffler 



The author quotes an eclectic range of Taoist works dating from the Han (206 
b.c.-a.d. 220) to the early Song (960-1279). The sources cited are said to number 
more than 200 (CGF 241-42); they actually involve an even larger number of titles 
than meets the eye, because two early Song anthologies, Taiping guangji and YJQQ, 
are cited globally. The chief documentary value of the present text lies in its preser- 
vation of passages from earlier works, many of which are no longer independently 
extant. 

As the preface makes clear, however, the didactic intention of the book was primar- 
ily of a religious nature. Zhuxuan first points to the apologetic purpose of hagiog- 
raphy: immortals left “traces” in order to convince unbelievers of the possibility of 
transcendence. He then evokes the long-standing philosophical debate about human 
nature and innate endowment as opposed to moral cultivation and spiritual attain- 
ment through learning; he includes an allusion to the famous Chan pp contribution 
to the debate, opposing “sudden” and “gradual” enlightenment. The preface writer, 
and by implication the author, adopt Wu Yun’s (d. 778) argument that immortality 
could indeed be attained through study (see Wu’s “Shenxian ke xue lun infill 
in iosi Zongxuan xiansheng wenji 2.9b-i6a) — hence the usefulness of transmitting such 
materials as furnished by the “traces of immortals” and collected in this book. 

Franciscus Verellen 



Sandong qunxian lu ^ PI SIMlIl 
20 juan 

Compiled by Chen Baoguang I'll it ; preface (dated 1154) by Lin Jizhong 
ftp , zi Zhuxuan Yj ff 
1248 (fasc. 992-995) 

“Records of the Multitude of Immortals of the Three Caverns.” Zhuxuan (preface, 
4a) refers to the author as Taoist master of the Jingying an ff ftg 1 f| sanctuary in Jiang- 
yin Kill (Jiangsu). 

The records form an anthology of paired episodes taken from various biographies 
of the immortals. The topic for each pair is set out in a heading consisting of a couplet 
of two four-character titles. The tides introduce antithetical or matching couples of a 
wide variety of entities: plants, animals, places, objects, numerical categories, types of 
religious practice, natural phenomena, and so on. Chen Baoguang’s method follows 
Wang Songnian’s tenth-century adaptation of the bianzhu tradition of 

literary leishu tfflt anthologies (see the article on S96 Xianyuan bianzhu). In effect, 
the topical arrangement of the material and systematic identification of the sources 
suggest that this work could also be used, like the classic Chuxueji, as a dictionary of 
quotations and for facilitating the memorization of sources for reference. 



Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian 
53 juan 

By Zhao Daoyi pg jjf — ; colophon by Liu Chenweng (dated jiawu ^ pp 

[1294]); preface by Deng Guangjian § 1 \JtM (dated jiawu [1294]) 

296 (fasc. 139-48) 

“Comprehensive Mirror of Immortals Who Embodied the Tao through the Ages.” 
The author, who is referred to as Zhao Quanyang in one of the prefaces, is 

virtually unknown outside the context of this work. Nor can the date of the book be 
determined with certainty. However, thanks to the several prefaces and presentation 
memorials, a number of hypotheses may be advanced. 

The authors of the colophon, Liu Chenweng (1232-1297), and the author of one 
of the prefaces, Deng Guangjian (1232-1303), are both well-known figures of the late 
Song period: Deng rose to a relatively high rank in the administration. A patriot 
and Song loyalist, he attempted twice unsuccessfully to commit suicide after the fall 
of the dynasty. Having refused to respond to the overtures of the Yuan (1279-1368) 
general Zhang Hongfan Deng died in 1297 in retirement from public life. 

Liu Chenweng, like Deng Guangjian a native of Luling M HI , was active in late 
Song (960-1279) Neo-Confucian circles and closely associated with the prominent 



Li 




3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 889 ] 



[ 888 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 

scholar Zhou Lianxi \a\ M M- Liu also withdrew from official life after the Mongol 
victory. 

It is likely that Zhao Daoyi compiled his work during the two decades after the 
fall of the Song dynasty. The prefaces -by literati living in retirement and, like many 
former officials during that period, drawn to Taoism— suggest as much. Moreover, 
Zhao Daoyi states in his own foreword that his history covers the period from antiq- 
uity to the end of the Song. In his preface, dated jiawu Ef 3 ^,Liu Chenweng says that 
the book’s contents reached up to “contemporary” times, which should refer to the 
year 1294. Finally, the section devoted to the Heavenly Master movement includes a 
biography of the thirty-fifth patriarch; it was presumably written during the lifetime 
of the Thirty-sixth Heavenly Master. The latter lived around the end of the Song and 
the beginning of the Yuan: we know that he was a young man in the Xianheng reign 
period (1266-1274) and in full activity under Kublai Khan, who conferred a tide on 
him in 1291. 

An indication of Zhao Daoyi’s place of origin can be gleaned from his tide: Fuyun 
shan Shengshou wannian gong daoshi Ojlg|||§;f£giI±. According to the 
biography of Li Babai in juan 10, this was the Fuyun guan §§, renamed 

Fuyun shan under the Song, situated in Fengxin county in the superior pre- 

fecture of Longxing It® /ft (in modern Nanchang g, Jiangxi). Luling, the place 
of origin of the two preface writers Deng and Liu, is very close to Nanchang. 

Our text (the LZTT) presents itself as a history of Taoism narrated through the lives 
of individuals who had obtained the Tao; it is supplemented by 297 Lishi zhenxian tieUw 
tongjian xubian and 298 Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian houji. The former continues the 
section that is devoted to immortals under the Song; the latter is a compilation of lives 
of female immortals. 

This vast undertaking aimed at nothing less than providing Taoism with its own 
‘Comprehensive Mirror” ( tongjian i§fi£), a counterpart to Sima Guang’s Zizhi tong- 
pan and the Buddhist chronicle Shishi tongjian However, the resulting his- 

tory is not an annalistic chronicle in the style of 770 Hunyuan shengji (1191), which was 
also known, in the historiographical tradition, as the “Veritable Record of Lord Lao” 

(. Hunyuan shilu MjtVM). Besides chronicles of this kind, Taoism also possessed a 
hagiographical literature consisting of the lives of saints in the tradition of 294 Liexian 
zhuan , the Shenxian zhuan ftftdjfU, and 29s Xu xian zhuan , comprising in all 1,600 
biographies, as affirmed in the prefaces to the present work. 

The aim of Zhao Daoyi’s work, then, was to place this biographical material into 
the chronological framework provided by official historiography and the histories of 
Taoism. In general, his editorial procedure consisted in transcribing the biographies 
word for word— sometimes adding a brief conclusion as to the manner in which a 
saint’s life reflected the teaching of the Daode jing -and in arranging them 



according to his own groupings. The chronological succession of the lives is compli- 
cated by two sets of factors: first, by the semilegendary nature of much of the mate- 
rial, that is, by the saints’ extraordinary longevity and by their propensity to return in 
various reincarnations; and, second, the need to account for the immortals’ filiation in 
terms of the various movements or schools. As a result, the organization of the work 
is subject to three main principles: (1) the order preestablished by earlier collections 
on which the present work draws; (2) the subjects’ filiation according to schools; and 
(3) historical chronology. In the following, the LZTT will be discussed under the 
headings of these three sometimes irreconcilable criteria. 

1. The sources: Two main types of sources can be distinguished: those on which 
the author drew directly for his biographical material and those that indirectly guided 
the organization and composition of the work. Some of the earlier collections appear 
to have been used in both ways at once. Direct sources include 294 Liexian zhuan, 
which occupies the entire juan 3. All of its biographies are incorporated here, with the 
exception of the lives of Anqi and of the female immortals who are included in 
the 298 Houji. The biographies are, however, arranged in a different order, reflecting, 
perhaps, the author’s views regarding their chronological succession. Material from 
the Shenxian zhuan , attributed to Ge Hong, occupies a large part of juan 5 and is 
strongly represented in juan 11, 12, 13, and 34. In addition, biographies drawn from 
that work are found scattered throughout the first two thirds of the present text. Juan 
17 consists entirely of biographies taken from 1016 Zhen’gao 12, 13, and 14. Juan 12-16 
likewise include material from that work. 

The Dongxian zhuan jfBj f[I| fU , a lost collection of the late Six Dynasties period (220- 
589), is known today mainly from citations in YJQQ 109 and other Song anthologies 
(see Yan Yiping, Daojiao yanjiu ziliao , vol. 1). It is the source of most of the biographies 
in juan 6 and of others found throughout the remainder of the present collection. The 
work 29s Xu xian zhuan , by Shen Fen tfc (ft of the Southern Tang (937-975) dynasty, is 
completely reproduced in juan 36 (where only the biographies of Song Yu 5 f 5 fl, Wei 
Shanjun and Zhang Huigan derive from different sources), juan 37 

(except Xue Chang jpi H , Wu Yun, Li Bo $ Aj ), juan 38 (except Liu Xuanhe 2 / fO, 
Yang Taiming % ^ EjJj , Li He ^ ft , Xuanyuan Miming $f Ejfj ), and juan 39 (only 

Du Sheng ft; , Yang Xi , and Tan Qi ao ) ; isolated biographies from this work 

are found scattered throughout the present text: those of Luqiu Fangyuan (juan 
40); Nie Shidao (juan 41); Xu Jun and Qian Lang i/tlUl (juan 45); and 

others. 

The Zhenxi flt (dated 805), by Li Bo jfjj, preserved in the form of citations in 
YJQQ 5, provided the material for juan 24-25, devoted to Maoshan. The YJQQ itself, 
especially the section entitled “Biographies” ( zhuan fU), appears to have been used 
directly in the elaboration of the “Comprehensive Mirror,” without mention of the 



[ Spo ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ Spi ] 



sources on which its material was based in turn. See the following chapters: YJQQ 

104, biographies of Mao Ying incorporated in abridged form in LZTT 16, and 

of the saints of the Louguan tSSI, Yin Gui Song Lun 5 ^fm, Feng Chang 

Yao Dan Zhou Liang jW|^, and others, reproduced in LZTT 8 and 9; YJQQ 

105, the biography of Pei Jun H ft , included in abridged form in LZTT 15; YJQQ 106, 
the biographies of Wang Bao Zhou Yishan fp] H ill , Ma Mingsheng 

and Yin Changsheng reproduced in LZTT 13 and 14. Although it is possible 

that Zhao Daoyi used the same ulterior sources as the YJQQ independently, his adop- 
tion of the same groupings as found in the YJQQ suggests that the latter provided his 
material for juan 8, 9, 13, 14, and 16. 

The Xuanyuan benji ijif a chronicle of Huangdi if composed under the 

Song that survives only in its version in YJQQ 100, is fully incorporated in LZTT 1. 
The 770 Hunyuan shengji (dated 1191), an annalistic account of Taoism organized 
around the manifestations of Laozi in history, served as the basis for the composition 
of LZTT 2. Such mysterious figures from high antiquity as Yougu da xiansheng 

Yu Huazi and others are taken from that work; an exception is 

Guangcheng zi US whose biography is based on the Shenxian zhuan. 

The Gaodao zhuan (between 1068 and 1101), which survives only in fragmentary 
form, appears to have been a major source for the “Comprehensive Mirror”— and 
Zhao Daoyi’s preferred choice when he had to select among several earlier biographies 
of the same saint. This work is massively represented from LZTT 39 onward. It would 
seem, for example, that the lives of personalities associated with the Louguan temple 
in juan 39-40 were transcribed via the Gaodao zhuan , rather than die Louguan zhuan 
fligfi, the main earlier source for this material. Whenever it is possible to compare 
one of these biographies in the LZTT with fragments from the Gaodao zhuan and the 
Louguan zhuan , thanks to their citations in the 1248 Sandong qunxian lu, Zhao Daoyi’s 
text appears to be closer to the former than to the latter. 

The Tulongji 3 EPSII (dated 1224) of Bo Yuchan, reproduced in 263.31 Xiuzhen 
shishu , constituted the basis for the two chapters devoted to Xu Xun and his dis- 
ciples, LZTT 26-27. As for the Jixian zhuan tj|{([|flj (twelfth century) of Zeng Zao, 
no more than an outline remains of this possible source that included biographies of 
most of the Five Dynasties (907-960) and Song immortals in the LZTT. Among other 
likely sources, yp2 Shenxian ganyu zhuan by Du Guangting seems to have provided, 
direcdy or indirecdy, the material for many biographies in juan 22. 

Without necessarily serving as direct sources, certain collections had an influence 
on the composition and arrangement of the LZTTs contents: The organization of the 
Louguan zhuan , though the work itself is no longer extant, can be reconstructed in 
outline from the preface of the Zhongnan shan shuojing tai lidai zhenxian beiji j^j [JL[ 
DiH'n (see CGF 265). The list of names indicated there corresponds 



to the organization of two sections in the present work, LZTT 8-9 and 39-40. The 
Nine Immortals of the Southern Peak of the Six Dynasties (see 4S3 Nanyue xiaolu) are 
grouped together in LZTT 33; those of the Tang, who claimed spiritual descent from 
Sima Chengzhen, are included in juan 40. Their biographies, however, do not 
derive from this source. The 444 Dongxuan lingbao sanshiji may have provided the 
spiritual lineage of three Nanyue masters under the Tang. 

2. Lineages and schools: The arrangement of the main body of the LZTT can be 
explained neither by chronology alone, nor by the organization of earlier collections; 
instead, Zhao Daoyi arranged his material according to spiritual lineages or schools 
as perceived by a Taoist at the end of the Song. In the following we shall retrace the 
main lineages that emerge from the LZTT. 

The avatars of Laozi: all of juan 2 is devoted to these figures, including a series of 
figures from high antiquity perceived as being early manifestations of Laozi (see the 
biography of Yin Xi ^ U ; 8.ia-3b). 

The immortals of antiquity: the subjects of the Liexian zhuan , grouped together 
in chapter 3. They presumably represented for the author a coherent set of Taoists or 
fangshi 7} it. 

Yin Xi and the early Louguan: the section LZTT 8-9 concerns the transmission of 
the doctrine from Yin Xi to Yin Gui and the Nine Saints of Louguan. 

The Maoshan movement: the author distinguishes a pre-Maoshan phase— con- 
sisting of the lineage from An Qisheng to Yin Changsheng (juan 13), of the 

first instructors and deities of Maoshan (juan 14-16), and of various sages connected 
with Maoshan (throughout juan 17-23) — and the lineage of the Maoshan patriarchs 
themselves (juan 24-25). Possibly, the biographies in juan 11-12 should be added to 
this group: though mostly taken from the Shenxian zhuan , they also feature in 1016 
Zhen’gao and represent the southern tradition of Taoism described by Ge Hong, 
which underlay the Maoshan movement. 

Zhang Daoling and the Heavenly Master movement: the biography 

of Zhang Daoling occupies all of juan 18 and is followed by the remainder of the 
movement’s lineage in juan 19. It is not clear why this well-defined group is found 
embedded in the Maoshan material. 

The Way of Filial Piety (Xiaodao ^iM) of Xishan (5 [i| : following an arrange- 
ment similar to juan 18 and 19, a first chapter (juan 26) is devoted to the founder of 
this movement, Xu Xun, and his eleven disciples are grouped together in the next 
(juan 27). The period covered extends from die Jin to the Tang. It appears that this 
movement is placed immediately after the Maoshan movement because the Xiaodao 
claimed that Xu Xun belonged to the same Xu family that had been responsible for 
transmitting the Maoshan revelations. 

The second Louguan: Juan 29-30 contain the lives of the immortals of the 




[ S92 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 893 ] 



Louguan, many of whom participated in the controversy with the Buddhists under 
the Northern Wei (386-534). The majority of these figures lived in the period between 
the Northern Wei and the Sui (581-618). 

The immortals of the Southern Peak (Nanyue l^j JK ) : the lives of the Nine Im- 
mortals of Nanyue, as well as a certain number of other immortals associated with 
that mountain but not included in 4-S3 Nanyue xiaolu, are found in juan 33. Juan 39-40 
groups together immortals of the Second Nanyue, according to master-disciple 
relationships. These immortals claimed descent from the Maoshan patriarch Sima 
Chengzhen and included the Tiantai master Du Guangting (sec also 444 Dong- 
xuan lingbao sanshiji). The immortals in juan 41-42 are thematically related to this 
group: Nie Shidao HjSjjjlf is connected to Luqiu Fangyuan (the last biography 
in juan 40); Zhang Yun W<M, (the second biography in juan 41) is connected to both 
Ye Fashan (juan 39) and Luo Gongyuan (juan 40); the last figure in juan 41, Zhai 
Fayan was the master of Shu Xuji who opens juan 42. 

The lineage of Lu Dong bin: Quanzhen R saints claiming descent from Lti 
Dongbin are loosely grouped in juan 45-49, while the masters of the related Jin- 
lian movement, tracing their origin to Zhongli Quan, are found dispersed 
throughout the work. It may be noted that many of the Taoists in juan 45-47 were 
connected to the court and to Neo-Confucian circles. 

3. The chronological framework: Given the emphasis in this work on tracing lin- 
eages and lines of transmission, overall chronology suffered inevitable distortions. The 
first biography, that of the Yellow Emperor as patron of the immortals and founder 
of Chinese civilization, is followed by lesser figures of preceding ages. Nevertheless, 
Zhao Daoyi’s history of Taoism from antiquity to the Yuan is roughly continuous, at 
least in terms of his sequential treatment of the founders of major movements (a major 
exception to this rule, however, is the emergence of the Heavenly Masters in juan 18). 
Despite internal inconsistencies within individual sections, the following phases may 
be distinguished: from the beginnings to the Later Han (juan 1— 14); Six Dynasties to 
Sui (juan 15-30); Sui to Five Dynasties (juan 31-45); and Five Dynasties to the end of 
the Song (juan 45—53)- 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ozaki Masaharu, “ Rekishi shinsen taidd tsukanV 

Jean Levi , revised by Franciscus Verellen 



Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian xubian 

5 juan 

Attributed to Zhao Daoyi t§)|| — ; fourteenth or fifteenth century? 

297 (fasc. 149) 

“Supplement to the Comprehensive Mirror of Immortals Who Embodied the 
Tao through the Ages.” This work supplements 296 Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian. It 
provides additional biographies to the latter, extending its chronological span to the 
Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) and Yuan (1279-1368) periods. The emphasis is on Quanzhen 
^ (R masters. 

Jean Levi 

Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian houji !f£ ift R f|lj f! M ii $8 HI 

6 juan 

By Zhao Daoyi Ifi jM— ; fl. 1294 

298 (fasc. 150) 

“Continuation of the Comprehensive Mirror of Immortals Who Embodied the 
Tao through the Ages.” This work supplements 296 Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian. It 
is devoted to female immortals from antiquity to the end of the Song. Most of the 
material is taken from 783 Tongcheng jixian lu. 

Jean Levi 

Xuanpin lu Una 

5 juan 

By Zhang Tianyu bao Gouqu waishi JjJ ; 1335 

781 (fasc. 558-559) 

“Records of the Categories of the Mysterious.” The preface by the author (var. 
Zhang Yu jif [ 1276-1342] ; see Sun Kekuan, Hanyuan daolun , 292-94) is dated with 
the cyclical characters yihai that is, the year 1335. Here, Zhang calls his work a 
“History of the Mysterious” ( Xuanshi £ ^ ), saying that he searched for persons to 
whom Sima Tan’s f?I H definition of the Taoist school (from Shiji 130.3292) would 
apply. As a result, Zhang collected 144 biographies and arranged them according to 
dynasties— starting with Yin Xi from Zhou (ca. 1050-221 B.c.) times up to Liu 

Yongguang (1134-1206). Within the dynasties, the biographies are again grouped 
in various categories (e.g. “Daode pin Jiff era,” categories of Tao and De; “Daoyin if 
IS,” Taoist hermits; “Daoru JMfnf Taoist scholars). 

With few exceptions, Zhang does not give the sources for his compilation, but it is 
evident that apart from the Zhuangzi (e.g., i.3b-6a) and 1016 Zhen’gao (e.g., i.i5a-b), he 
did not use any specifically Taoist material. Instead, he attempted an objective, official 
presentation of Taoist personalities by taking biographies, mostly verbatim or slightly 




[ 894 ] 3 .A .6 Sacred History and Geography 



abridged, from the following official histories: Shiji, Han shu, Hou Han shu, Wei shu, 
Jin shu, Nan shi, Sui shu,Jiu Tang shu, Xin Tang shu , and Xin Wudai shi. It is not clear 
what his sources were for the biographies from the Song dynasty (960-1279). 

Hans -Hermann Schmidt 




figure 34. Gengsangzi 
(163 2b) 




Xuanyuan shizi tu JZ Jt + -f' ® 

13 fols. 

By Zhao Mengfu (1254-1322); colophon 

dated 1286 
163 (fasc. 72) 

“Portraits of Ten Masters of the Mysterious Origin.” 
According to his colophon, Zhao made this small album 
at the request of his master, Du Daojian, hew Nangu zi 
(1237-1318; see second colophon, dated 1306). The pres- 
ent version is based on a printed edition by a certain Lu 
Daotong (alias Lu Mingzhen JJ) of Chang- 

chun (Jiangsu). Lu launched a subscription for the 
financing of his initiative and requested prefaces from a 
number of famous contemporaries: Zhang Yucai jjJIflM, 
the Thirty-eighth Heavenly Master (d. 1316; Zhang origi- 
nally also wrote a colophon to Zhao’s work); Yao Yun 
% ( jinshi j(t:b 1268); and the daoshi Huang Zhonggui 
and Huang Shiweng ffLjIra. According to this 
last preface, the blocks of this printing were kept at the 
Taiqing gong IK at Bozhou j'fj (Laozi’s birthplace, 
in Henan), whereas Du Daojian had the portraits 
copied onto murals for his temple, the Zongyang guan 

mmm. 

The ten portraits are those of Guanyin zi Wenzi 

Gengsang zi (fig. 3+), Nanrong zi 

Yinwen zi Shicheng zi ± -p , Cuiqu zi H p , 

Boju zi Liezi PJ p , and Zhuangzi $£p- (fig. 35). 

The album originally appears to have included a picture 
of Laozi as well. The work was copied by the Yuan artist 
Hua Tangqing (see Guoyun lou shuhuaji, “Hualei,” 

2.11b). The daoshi Sun Dafang obtained this copy 

and undertook to have it printed (see Huang Shiweng’s 
preface). 



figure 35. Zhuangzi 
(163 8a) 



Caroline Gyss-Vermande 



3 .A .6 Sacred History and Geography [ 89s ] 



Xiaoyao xu jing iff ti f ? 

2 juan 

By Hong Yingming $fc,KSE!Jj, zi Zicheng § U; ca. 1600 

1465 (fasc. 1081) 

Changsheng quanjing McLSff 

23 fols. 

Supplement to 146s Xiaoyao xujing 

1466 (fasc. 1082) 

Wusheng juejing £? 

36 fols. 

Supplement to 146s Xiaoyao xujing 

1467 (fasc. 1082) 

“Book of the Land of Ecstatic Wanderings.” This work has a preface by Yuan Huang 
ft If (1533-1606), in which he states that he had received a “chronicle of immortals” 
(xianji f[ij$E) entitled Xiaoyao you ffjjM from Hong Zicheng (i.e., Hong Yingming). 
The tide is an allusion to the first chapter of the Zhuangzi. 

Hong Yingming, who was equally interested in Taoism and in Buddhism, is mainly 
known for his Chan work Cat gen tan . His background and dates remain 

uncertain, but he probably lived in the second half of the sixteenth century. 

The textual history of the present work is problematic. The same text is found in a 
collection of writings by Hong Yingming titled Xian fo qizong f[l|f$j nf which has 
come down in two main editions: a palace edition in four juan published in 1602 and 
discussed in the Siku quanshu zongmu under the heading of “fiction” ( xiaoshuo pa£ ), 
and the edition titled Tuedan tang xianfo qizong hekan. We have been able to consult 
only the latter. 

The Xianfo qizong comprises four parts, arranged in a two-tiered compilation. Its 
first section is devoted to Taoists, with illustrated hagiographies of immortals and an 
appendix entitled “Changsheng quan H (fc Hi •” A Buddhist counterpart to this section 
is organized in the same way: biographies of bodhisattvas and eminent Chan masters, 
entitled “Ji guang jing followed by an appendix containing selected quota- 

tions, titled “Wusheng jue 4S fz jj£ .” The work as a whole is preceded by two prefaces. 
The first of these, referring to Taoism, corresponds to the preface of the work in the 
Daozang under discussion, but, unlike the latter, it is signed; the second preface con- 
cerns the Buddhist dimension of the work and bears the signature of Feng Mengzhen 
MWffi (1546-1605). 

In the palace edition, the biographies of the immortals form the first juan, the 
Taoist anthology the second, the Buddhist hagiographies the third, and the Buddhist 
quotations the fourth. By contrast, in the Xianfo qizong , the biographies of immortals 




[ Sg 6 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 897 ] 



occupy the first three juan and the “Changsheng quan” forms the fourth. The remain- 
ing four juan contain the Buddhist counterpart. Also only juan 5 and 8 have tides, 
while the illustrated parts bear the general designations “Liexian and “Fozu {$} 

.” Moreover, the biographies in the Xian fo qizong are arranged in a different order 
from that in the Daozang and palace editions, which are identical in this respect, and 
a certain number of biographies are missing altogether (in particular that of the last 
Taoist immortal under the Ming). 

In the Daozang , two of the parts constituting the Xian fo qizong follow immediately 
after 146s Xiaoyao xujing, as 1466 Changsheng quanjing and 1467 Wusheng juejing . The 
latter work features a colophon dated 1607 by the Fiftieth Heavenly Master, who was 
also responsible for an edition of the work; this colophon likely applies to all three 
parts. The Heavenly Master’s edition was probably made on the basis of the palace 
edition by removing the Buddhist biographies and dividing 146s Xiaoyao xu jing into 
two juan in order to preserve an identical number of chapters. The supplement to the 
Daozang, Xu Daozang in turn based itself on this edition, grouping the three 

works into four chapters, for after the first two juan of 146s Xiaoyao xujing , the same 
numbering continues through the following two works: 1466 Changsheng quanjing 
and 1467 Wusheng juejing bear the designations “juan 3” and “juan 4,” respectively, 
under their titles. 

However, prior to their incorporation into illustrated editions placing the two 
religions side by side, in accordance with the syncretic tastes of the time, the three 
works that make up the Xian fo qizong appear to have circulated in separate editions 
or manuscript versions, as is suggested by Yuan Huang’s preface and by the title of the 
edition in eight juan, the Xian fo qizong heke ilhiffiaffflt. pi, or “combined edition.” 
Moreover, each of the two appendixes bear their author’s name in this edition, and in 
the 1602 edition each section occupies a separate chapter. 

The confused numbering of the parts of the three texts in the Daozang no doubt 
reflects the editors’ uncertainty as to whether they should be treated as a single work, 
following the example of the Heavenly Master, or whether they constituted three 
separate entities. In fact, the three texts in the Daozang are quite unrelated and should 
be treated separately. 

The 1465 Xiaoyao xu jing is a collection of sixty-three biographies ofTaoist immortals, 
beginning with a life of Laozi and concluding with the hagiography of Zhang Sanfeng 
?§ AJ the famous Taoist of the late Yuan (1279-1368) and early Ming (1368-1644) 
periods who became a popular saint from the seventeenth century onward. 

The work can thus be considered a history of Taoism from its beginnings to the 
Ming, viewed through the lives of the immortals. Although the author drew his mate- 
rial from traditional hagiographies by transcribing or condensing them, 146s Xiaoyao 
xu jing is more than a simple synopsis of the great collections such as LZTT. The 



originality of the work lies in its selection. This work is, for example, the only com- 
pendium of immortals’ lives featuring the complete set of the Eight Immortals ( haxian 
A fill). By omitting all details concerning textual filiations, imperial canonizations, 
and cults devoted to the immortals, the author emphasizes the anecdotal aspect of 
his subject while minimizing its religious content. The work can thus be said to rep- 
resent the popular Taoist pantheon of the Ming from a— albeit sympathetic— literati 
perspective. 

It is difficult to identify Hong Yingming’s sources with confidence because the 
traditional material had already been extensively shared by earlier collections. The fol- 
lowing sources, however, can be singled out: LZTT, the Liexian zhuan AflllfH, and 
781 Xuanpin lu. For certain immortals, including Cao Guojiu If SK, Li Tieguai A 
MOn, Mayi zi l/ft A A, and Zhang Sanfeng, whose lives figure in none of the great 
pre-Ming collections, the author’s sources remain unknown. 

Jean Levi 

Soushen ji 

6 juan 

Reprinted in 1607 

1476 (fasc. 1105-1106) 

“In Search of the Gods.” This is a collection of fives of saints and legendary figures 
canonized from antiquity up to the Ming (1368-1644); it assumes the title of the 
well-known work by Gan Bao AW (A- 317-322). The author of the preface explains 
that he had read a Soushen ji at the Fuchun tang of Sanshan H l_L| 1 § § 'g[ in Nanking; 
although the text had little in common with the reconstructions of the Soushen ji, it 
nevertheless preserved its spirit. A note dated 1607 by Zhang Guoxiang the 

editor of the supplement to the Daozang, Xu Daozang £J?il$i, indicating that the 
present version had undergone editorial changes, closes the work. 

The Xu Daozang edition is in fact a reprint, without the illustrations, of the 
work published by the Fuchun tang; the latter work included a preface dated 1593 
by Luo Maodeng (see Naikaku bunko, Naikaku bunko Kanseki bunrui 

mokuroku , 285b). The present text is related to but distinct from the late-Ming work 
Sanjiao yuanliu shengdi fozu soushen daquan, reprinted by Ye Dehui in 1909 

(see Li Xianzhang, “ Sankyo sojin daizen” 79-83; Dudbridge, The legend ofMiao-shan, 
58-59). 

The collection opens with biographies of the founders of the Three Teachings: 
Confucius, the Buddha, and Laozi. In addition to deified virtuous officials and a few 
representatives of the Buddhist pantheon and ofTaoist immortals, a large number of 
figures from classical mythology are included: the Master of Rain, the God of Wind, 
the Master of Lightning, Panhu, and others. A wide range of sources is cited. Each 




[ SgS ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 899 ] 



entry is provided with indications of the dates on which its subject was venerated, the 
temples dedicated to him, as well as lists of titles and canonizations. 

Jean Levi, revised, by Franciscus Verellen 



Han tianshi shijia fM ^ IS M. 

4 juan 

Edited by Zhang Guoxiang M PS , die Fiftieth Heavenly Master; published in 

1607 

1463 (fasc. 1066) 

“Hereditary House of the Heavenly Master of the Han Dynasty.” This text contains 
the biographies of the Tianshi of the Longhu shan (Jiangxi) lineage. The 

present enlarged version includes as its last entry the life of the Forty-ninth Heavenly 
Master, Zhang Yongxu (d. 1565). The work contains, however, many traces of 

earlier editions. 

According to the preface by Zhang Yuchu (1361-1410), placed as a colophon in the 
present work (see also his 1311 Xicmquanji 2.6a-8a), the compilation of the Han tian- 
shi shijia was first undertaken by his father, the Forty-second Heavenly Master, Zhang 
Zhengchang 'M IE 'S' (d. 1377). It was he who then invited the famous scholar Song 
Lian 5 ^;$$ (1310-1381) to write the preface (dated 1376) that still figures in the present 
edition. The compilation apparently left something to be desired, and Zhang Yuchu 
revised it completely before he had it printed. He requested a preface from Su Boheng 
(dated 1390). 

The present edition was brought up to date by Zhang Guoxiang, the editor of the 
1607 supplement to the Taoist canon. Several authors contributed prefaces: ZhouTian- 
qiu ID (dated 1593), Wang Dexin ZE $T ( jinshi Mi, 1573), and Yu Wenwei Hfj 
ifl? (dated 1597). Yu, a native of Yunnan, submitted his preface on his own initiative. 
The five prefaces together constitute the first juan of the work. 

The second juan contains the biography of the First Heavenly Master, preceded by 
an introduction (yin J \ ) by Zhang Yue MM ( jinshi , 1508), who apparently had also 
revised the work. Zhang Yue, himself a native from Jiangxi, was a personal friend of 
the Forty-eighth Heavenly Master, Zhang Yanpian MMM (d. 1537). 

The history of the Longhu shan Heavenly Masters is beset by contradictions, at 
least early on. As has been pointed out by several historians (see Schipper, Annuaire 
de I’Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes , Ve Section— Sciences Religieuses 91 [1982-1983] : 
133—36), the institution of the Tianshi dao of the Six Dynasties and early Tang 

periods was different from the Longhu shan establishment. In the former, not one but 
all direct descendants of the First Heavenly Master had the right to the hereditary title 
and to the office of Inspector of Merit ( dugong fPJfr) of the Yangping zhi T : tu , 
the first of the dioceses. It was not until the mid-Tang period that the Tianshi temple 












on Longhu shan in Jiangxi became an important pilgrimage center and that its claim 
to be the original cradle of the Tianshi lineage emerged. The history of the lineage 
was then reinvented. The present work bears witness to this fact, for instance, by at- 
tributing exceptional longevity to earlier generations: from the death of Zhang Heng 
M'$! in 179 to the death of the fifteenth Heavenly Master, Zhang Shilong jjUtirit, 
during the Zhenyuan era (785-804) more than 600 years elapsed, during which there 
were thirteen Heavenly Masters, whereas during the following 600 years there were 
twenty-nine successors. The discrepancies in the making of the tradition can also be 
seen through a comparison with earlier biographies as recorded, for instance, in LZlT 
19. There the lineage extends up to the thirty-fifth generation under the Southern 
Song period. These biographies may therefore have been compiled by the Thirty-sixth 
Heavenly Master, Zhang Zongyan MttM (d. 1291). 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Singling 



Xu taishi zhenjun tuzhuan vfc ife 91 © HI fil 

2 juan 

440 (fasc. 197) 

“Life of the Grand Astrologer Xu.” This is a richly illustrated hagiography of the 
great saint Xu Xun, who is said to have risen up to Heaven in 291 a.d. (figs. 36-38). 
Stories about Xu and his companion Wu Meng became current during the early 

medieval period. They greatly amplified during the Tang (618-907), giving rise to 
the Way of Filial Piety (Xiaodao ^M) movement that was based on their lore (see 
4 - 4-9 Xiaodao Wu Xu er zhenjun zhuan). Toward the end of the Tang, the holy places 
related to the worship of the immortal official, notably the temples on Xishan j§ [_L( 
near Nanchang F£j H (Jiangxi), became major pilgrimage centers. 

At the beginning of the thirteenth century, Bo Yuchan wrote an extensive hagi- 
ography of Xu Xun and the lesser saints of his school under the title Tulongji 2 PH 
jj| (263.31 Xiuzhen shishu). That work provided, with some variants, the basis for the 
present illustrated hagiography. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Schipper, “Taoist ritual and local cults.” 

Kristofer Schipper 

Xu zhenjun xianzhuan tf $! t} 

17 fols. 

Yuan (1279-1368) 

447 (fasc. 200) 

“Hagiography of Zhenren Xu.” This is a Yuan version of the biography of Xu Xun 
in Bo Yuchan’s Tulongji ZEPHUI (dated 1224), reproduced in 263.31 Xiuzhen shishu. 



[ 900 ] 3 .A .6 Sacred History and Geography 




figure 36. Xu Xun fighting mountain 
spirits (440 i.iyb-2oa). Ming reprint 
of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/437) 




figure 37. Xu Xun smelting the iron 
pillar ( 440 2.7b-8b). Ming reprint of 
1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/437) 




figure 38. Xu Xun rising up to 
Heaven (440 2.i7b-i8a). Ming reprint 
of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/437) 



3 .A .6 Sacred History and Geography [ 901 ] 



The present version cannot be earlier than 1295, since the qualifier Zhidov xuanying S 
iM in its title (ia) was conferred under the reign of the Yuan emperor Chengzong 
(1295-1307; see iiio Jingming zhongxioo quonshu 1.12b). 

The text differs from that of Bo Yuchan in the following respects: the actual 
deeds of the saint (263 Xiuzhen shishu 33) are slightly abridged, and the notes are 
incorporated into the text; the chapter concerning his posthumous career in 263 
Xiuzhen shishu 34 is lacking here; the biographies of his eleven disciples are consider- 
ably shortened (263 Xiuzhen shishu 35 in 263 corresponds to I4b-i6b in the present 
version); and among the various saints of the movement that form the subject of 
(263 Xiuzhen shishu 36), only a succint account of Hu tianshi is included 

here. 

Jean Levi 

Xishan Xu zhenren bashiwu hua lu |§ ill i'f (ft S A'f'E'fbKI 
3 fols. 4 3 juan 

Foreword and preface dated 1246; postface dated 1250, signed Yongwu zhenren 
Shi Cen Ufa 01 second postface, by Sun Yuanming dated 

dingwei ~f 7^ (1247) 

448 (fasc. 200) 

“Record of the Eighty-five Manifestations of Zhenren Xu of Xishan.” This is a re- 
edition of the legend of Xu Xun compiled by Bo Yuchan in his Tulongji 3£PH HI 
(dated 1224), reproduced in 263.31 Xiuzhen shishu (q.v.) 

The author— whose identity is concealed behind the name of one of the disciples 
of the patriarch of the Loyalty and Filiality (Zhongxiao ,®^) movement, Shi Cen— 
states in his presentation note that Xu Xun’s teaching had enjoyed great popularity 
after the saint’s “descent” at Jinling in 1224, when he announced his doctrine. At that 
time, several sanctuaries were dedicated to him and a Yongwu monastery became 
the seat of a fervent group of followers of the Way of Filial Piety. This is how the 
movement began. Later, a certain Song Daosheng presented Shi Cen with a 

hagiography of the twelve saints of Xishan. To enliven the composition, Shi divided it 
into eighty-five scenes, each accompanied by a poem from his own brush. One of the 
members of the group undertook to collect funds to assure the work’s diffusion. 

In his postface, Sun Yuanming declares having received the visit of one of the mem- 
bers of the original circle, Jia Shoucheng M yf jf|, after a premonitory dream. Jia then 
passed the edition of Shi Cen on to him. 

The date of Xu Xun’s apparition in 1224 corresponds to that in Bo Yuchan’s 
biography of the saint. In a note on the Pavilion for Assembling Immortals of the 
Yulong monastery, the name of the hermitage of Xu Xun, Bo Yuchan marvels at 
the enthusiasm the sanctuary enjoyed at that time (written on the occasion of his third 




[ 902 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 

visit toXishan since 1218; see 263 Xiuzhen shishu 31.2b). The reedition of Bo Yuchan’s 
text thus fell in a period when the movement was thriving. 

Jean Levi 

Nanyuejiu zhenren zhuan j^j ti j| A f# 

7 fols. 

Edited by Liao Shen Northern Song (960-1127)? 

452 (fasc. 2O1) 

“Short Biographies of the Nine Zhenren of the Southern Peak.” This work gives an 
account of the lives of nine persons who obtained the Tao on Hengshan ffl (JL| between 
265 and 513 a.d. About Liao Shen no details are known apart from his official tides, 
but since in his introductory note he mentions the “commissioner of military affairs. 
Sun Mian [997-1067], of the present dynasty,” and since the work is listed as 
anonymous in the Tongzhi , “Yiwen liie,” 5.9a, we can conclude that Liao Shen probably 
lived in the late Northern Song period. 

The introductory note makes it clear that Liao was not the actual author. He was 
asked by the Taoist master Ouyang Daolong in whose family the biogra- 

phies had been preserved, to write a preface to the text, since Ouyang wished to have 
it printed (he had already printed the Durenjing HE A $? , Daodejing iff '{M I? , and the 
Jiuyoujing AiWM )• Liao states that he corrected and edited the text. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Zhongna n shan shuojing tai lidai zhenxian beiji 

19 fols. 

Zhu Xiangxian A % , zi Yixu sou — fM H ; end of thirteenth century 

956 (fasc. 605) 

“Stele and Inscription on the Platform of the Discourse on the Scriptures and 
Its Immortals through the Ages.” The Platform of the Discourse on the Scriptures 
(shuojing tai is traditionally the place where the Guardian of the Pass, Yin 

Xi All, received instruction, the Daode jing jjftiilM, and other scriptures from 
Laozi. 

The work comprises thirty-five biographies ofTaoists linked to the Louguan tradi- 
tion. It was presented to two high-ranking Quanzhen A M Taoists, the patriarch Nie 
Zhizhen ifj AR and the temple superintendent ( tidian Hlfi), Zhao Zhixuan |§A 
Si , by the author. The latter, a Maoshan Taoist and native of Gouqu hj ft , is also the 
author of another work on the Louguan tradition: 957 Gu louguan ziyun yanqing ji. 

Zhu Xiangxian states in his postface that he visited the Louguan in 1279 and found 
there a work in three juan: the Louguan xianshi zhuan IH ft! Additions to 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 903 ] 

this work, originally revealed by Yin Gui A$/l to Liang Chen in 305 (8b), were 
made during the Northern Zhou dynasty (557-581) by Wei Jie % %\ J (13a). It was later 
completed by Yin Wencao (d. 688). The Louguan xianshi zhuan, which was also 
known as Louguan nei zhuan ]Hi§ AfU (VDL 87), comprised thirty biographies of 
immortals. Zhu Xiangxian seems to have drawn upon these works for most of the 
biographies in our text. He is himself, nevertheless, the author of a few biographies 
and of the eulogies in verse at the end of each biography. The biographies from Zhu’s 
brush are those of Yin Xi, Yin Wencao, and three Taoists who lived during the Song 
(960-1279) and Yuan (1279-1368) periods: Liang Quan Yin Renping ASA, 
and Li Zhirou A A A • Yin Xi’s biography excepted, all the others are of the same, 
short length, which shows that the present work drastically abbreviated the original 
versions. The Louguan zhuan, quoted in S96 Xianyuan bianzhu , is not the same as the 
Louguan nei zhuan, since the quotations do not correspond to our text. 

Denis Allistone 

Huan zhenren shengxian ji HI |)t A A fill IB 

14 fols. 

301 (fasc. 151) 

“Record of Zhenren Huan’s Ascent to Immortality.” This work relates the legend of 
Tao Hongjing’s disciple Huan [Fa] kai AH (see, e.g., SDZN 1.17a), who in this 
version— unlike the historical tradition— travels from Sichuan to Maoshan to become 
Tao Hongqing’s lowliest servant. Secredy he strives for perfection and is finally, to 
everybody’s amazement, preferred to his ambitious master and summoned to Heaven 
before him. 

In the tale, neidan practices— and especially a method of meditation called “silent 
audience with the emperor on high” ( mochao shangdi hA; cf. 06 Shangqing 
tianxin zhengfa 6.5a-b) — are proposed as Huan’s recipe of success. The text can 
scarcely date from a period earlier than the tenth century, since it refers to the cult of 
the Three Offices of the Water-Palace ( shuiju san guan /RAH 'g' ; 9b). This cult was 
canonized for the first time in 928 by Yang Pu , ruler of the Wu and, later. Nan 
Tang empires ( Xin Wudaishi 61.758; see also Song huiyao jig ao 1:882). 

While a roughly similar, though much shorter, hagiography of Huan (Fa)kai exists 
already in the Shenxian ganyu zhuan A 1 fill by Du Guangting (in Taiping 
guangji 15.106; see Verellen, “Encounter as revelation,” 380), only Zeng Zao (d. 1155) 
refers to details in the present text (compare ioizDaoshu 8.ia-2b with ia-b, 3a-b, 5b, 
6a-b, and 7a-b in the present text). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Strickmann, “Saintly fools and Chinese masters.” 



Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 




[ 904 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 90s ] 



Taihua Xiyi zhi asi 

2 juan 

By Zhang Lu preface 1314 

306 (fasc. 160) 

“Records on [the Life of Chen] Xiyi of Huashan.” This is a biography of Chen 
Tuan, hao Xiyi (d. 989)- According to the author’s preface, Zhang Lu was an 
administrative clerk ( zhishi £l| in Jinning in the Hezhong [ 5 J 4 1 prefecture, 

not far from Huashan. It is there that he compiled this biography, based on mate- 
rial from diverse sources. Although the account is partly fact and mainly fiction, the 
author’s wish was to give Chen’s life a historical background. 

The first chapter is devoted to Chen Tuan’s fame at the court ofTaizong (r. 
976-997) of the Song dynasty. The second chapter, which is a collection of anecdotes 
on the Taoist and his contemporaries, also includes a bibliographical list of Chen’s 
works (7b). Zhu Xi’s (1130-1200) Wuchcw mingchen yanxing lu 10. 1 seems to have been 
the main source of a number of passages (i.ia-b, 8b-ioa, i3a-b; 2.2a-b, 3b-sa, 9a-i3b), 
but these passages have not been excerpted direedy from his works. Some passages 
(2.2b-3b) are extracts from Zhang Fangping’s (1007-1091) account in Lequanji 33. 

Most of the material has been excerpted from xiaoshuo literature of the Song 

period (960-1279). One passage (2.ia-2b) is taken from the Xiangshan yelu lljiflS 
by the Buddhist Wenying H, as quoted in the encyclopedia Huang Song shishi 
leiyuan by Jiang Shaoyu (twelfth century). A poem dedicated to Zhang Yong $|§}c 
(2.1b) is also from the same source. Another passage (2.1a) can be found in xhcQin- 
gxiang zaji by Wu Chuhou (eleventh century). 

Certain parts of our text (sa-b, 6a-b) have much in common with Chen Tuan’s 
biography in the LZTT 47. It is possible that both versions are based on the biography 
in the lost Gaodao zhuan. A short passage of our text (1.15a) is identical with the quota- 
tion in 1248 Sandong qunxian lu 13.10b, which gives the Gaodao zhuan as its source. This 
quotation also figures in the LZTT biography. Chen Tuan’s poems were famous 
during the Song, and our text includes some of them, the most important being an 
exchange of poems with Song Taizong in juan 1. The date indicated, Zhidao 1 (995), 
seems to be erroneous, since Chen Tuan died in 989. Th cXu Zizhi tongjian chang- 
bian states that the poems were written in Yongxi 1 (984). The source of the poems 
is lost, but some of them can also be found in other works. The first and the last of 
the poems in juan 1 (13b) figure in a biography of Chen Tuan attributed to Pang 
Jue Ill'll, included in the Qingsuo gaoyi. A monograph on Huashan, the Huayuezhi , 
reproduces some passages (i.3a-3b, 6b), three poems (1.7a), and also a poem by Song 
Taizong’s third messenger, Ge Shouzhong Wi^?^ (var. /£ ). 

Denis Allistone 



Taiji Ge xiangong zhuan H fill & fil 

29 fols. 

By Tan Sixian If ® zi Daolin jjtfa; preface by Zhu Chuo (dated 1377) 

450 (fasc. 201) 

“Biography of Ge [Xuan £ ], Duke-Immortal of the Taiji [Palace].” The preface by 
Zhu Chuo is dated by the cyclical characters dingsi T E . Since Zhu Chuo is listed as 
registrar ( zhubu Tiff) of Pingyin district (Shandong) during the early Ming 
( Jurongxian zhi 8.22b), dingsi stands for die year 1377. 

Zhu not only wrote the preface but also revised the text and rearranged its order. 
Tan Sixian, the compiler of this hagiography, was a Taoist in the Qingyuan monastery 
constructed in 508 a.d. on the site of Ge Xuan’s dwelling. As a basis for his 
work he used a “Biography of the Duke-Immortal” that had been recorded on the 
Gezao [S E l-U mountain (preface) where Ge is said to have obtained immortality. 
That biography, probably a Southern Song (1127-1279) work, apparendy served also 
as the basis for Ge Xuan’s biography in LZTT 23. In addition. Tan draws on odier 
sources, such as 1016 Zhen’gao and Shenxian zhuan Wflllffl. 

In the present text, we find appended to Ge’s hagiography (ia-22b) inscriptions by 
Fang Jun g ( jinshi j§± 1030) andTAO Hongjing (23a-26b; it corresponds to 
ioso Huayang Too yinjuji 2.sa-8b), as well as two Song edicts (dating from 1104 and 
1246, respectively) bestowing the titles Chongying zhenren FS R A and Chongying 
fiiyou zhenjun on Ge Xuan. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Tunfu shan Shen xianweng zhuan ft ^ ti l fli] H 

13 fols. 

First half of the fourteenth century 

451 (fasc. 201) 

“Biography of Shen, the Immortal Old Man from Mount Yunfu.” This hagiogra- 
phy, obviously written in the Yuan (1279—1368) dynasty (12b speaks of the “previous 
Song” and the “great Yuan”), gives an account of the career of Shen Taizhi ^ 
(687-755; ib, 7b-8a) and the cult devoted to him that was initiated on imperial order 
immediately after his death on Yunshan ftlJLl in Hunan and that was still continuing 
when this text was written. The hagiography concludes with an episode set in the 
ninth century attesting to the truth of this account, and with the imperial decree of 
1157 canonizing Shen as Miaoji zhenren R A- 

Various stories of Shen’s life that have been worked— in considerably modified and 
embellished form— into the present hagiography are found in the following earlier 
works: ia-3b, cf. Nanyue zongshengji 3.8a-b; 4a-b, cf. Longcheng lu i.7a-8a (where our 
protagonist is called Shen tianshi RAM); 5b— 6a, cf. Xianzhuanshiyi (in Taipingguangji 




[ 906 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 

33.210; the protagonist is named Shen Yuanzhi ioa-nb,cf. Chuanji f#|g (in 

Taiping guangji 69.428-31; the protagonist is Shen ticmshi or Shen Yuan ^ jc). Zhao 
Daoyi took these different names to stand for two different persons, cf. T . 7 T T 3 3 . 1 3b-i4a 
(identical with Nanyue zongsheng ji 3.8a-b) and 39-6b-7b (same as Xianzhuan shiyi). 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Tang Te zhenren zhuan 

35 fob. 

Ca. 1250 

779 (fasc. 557) 

“Biography of the Zhenren Ye [Fashan (A H ] of the Tang Dynasty.” The biography 
is preceded by a preface and a genealogical table of the Ye family. The preface by Ma 
Guangzu M ( hao Yuzhai is dated Chunyou (i24-i-i2Si),gengzi ? ■ But 

as th cgengzi year (1240) falls outside this period, the cyclical date is probably an 

error for gengxu FMfJc (1250) or renzi ffrT 1 (1252). 

In his preface (ia), which also mentions a cult of Ye Fashan, Ma writes that 
Zhang Daotong a Taoist from the Chongzhen ( 4 1 R monastery (in Lishui M 

7R county, Zhejiang), showed him a “Biography of the Heavenly Master Ye,” probably 
referring to the present work. The Chongzhen monastery, originally named Xuanyang 
guan M®, had once been established at Ye’s request; later on Ye was buried there 
(14a; i6b-i7b). 

According to the biography— which by means of numerous episodes illustrates 
Ye’s role as a Taoist at the court, but also as a helper of the people— Ye lived from 614 
to 720 (15a; cf. his biography in Jiu Tang shu 191). Appended, we find Ye’s petitions 
to Xuanzong together with the imperial replies (i7b-2ib), inscriptions for Ye and his 
ancestors, as well as edicts for the bestowal of honorary titles upon them (up to the 
year 1120). A fragment (29b-3ia) of the inscription by Xuanzong has been preserved 
in the Dunhuang manuscript Stein 4281. 

The present text is probably extensively based on older works. The Song bibli- 
ographies list a biography of Ye, written by Liu Gushen §£(] jj (see VDL 150). His 
biography in Taiping guangji 26.170-74 was assembled from episodes in Jiyi ji and 
Xianzhuan shiyi (ninth and tenth centuries) and, moreover, refers to his “proper biog- 
raphy” ( henzhuan $fH). 

For the confusion of Ye Fashan with Ye Jingneng to whom sometimes 

the same episodes are ascribed, see Yusa Noboru, “Yo Hozen.” 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Cadonna, II taoista di SuaMaestd; Ding Huang, “Ye Fashan”; Yusa Noboru, “Yo Hozen to 
Yo Jono.” 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 907 ] 

Diqi shangjiang Wen taibao zhuan fit fpft _h rf?f imA IS 

15 fols., with a supplement (buyi ^jj|) of 5 fols. 

Edited by Huang Gongjin if £JS; 1274 

780 (fasc. 557) 

“Life of Guardian Wen, Chief General of the Earth Spirits.” This hagiography of 
one of modern China’s great gods was originally written in 1258 by Liu Yu § j lj , 
hao Qingqing (ft HP, a daoshi from Sichuan. Liu’s preface has been preserved in 1220 
Daofa huiyuan 253.ia-3b. The postface by Huang Gongjin, dated 1274 and preserved 
in the same collection (253.9a-ioa), explains how Huang incorporated Liu’s work in 
a treatise on Guardian Wen and the earth spirits, which he had printed. 

The present hagiography’s format and style in fact transform it into a short story, 
an early example of the genre that was to become so popular in Yuan (1279-1368) 
and Ming (1368-1644) times. It gives a vivid and entertaining account of the god’s 
early years during the Tang dynasty (618-907), when he, a divine incarnation born in 
Pingyang (Wenzhou jm'j'H), served as a petty officer in the army of Guo Ziyi 
fj|. Thereafter he became a butcher of buffalo, a most sacrilegious trade. After 
being converted by a celestial envoy, he prepared himself for divine office by worship- 
ing the statue of an assistant of the god of Taishan ^ |JL| in the latter’s temple, having 
made the vow to become himself such an assistant after his death. The time for this 
transformation would come, he was told, when the statue had changed. When, there- 
upon, two boys tried to play a trick on him by painting the statue green and red and 
by sticking two boar’s tusks into its mouth. Wen died on the spot and transformed 
himself into a fierce guardian spririt in the image of the statue. Refusing the canoniza- 
tion by the state (guofeng HcjTf ) and bloody sacrifices ( xueshi iflLfir), he entered into 
the service of the Thirtieth Heavenly Master, Zhang Jixian (Xujing zhenren 

Sli? R A, 1092-1126), as a commander of the latter’s spirit army. In this capacity, 
Wen performed many great feats, and thus was canonized liturgically ( daofeng xlJ'f ) 
as Zhufa yiling zhaowu dashi taibao icft, which is the title he 

has in most rituals. While respecting Buddhism as one of the great ways of salvation. 
Wen was especially active against Buddhist heresies of the popular Santan Hfl sect. 
The supplement contains further adventures and, presumably, brings the story up to 
the times of Liu Yu and Huang Gongjin. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Katz, “Wen Ch’iung.” 

Kristofir Schipper 



Hans-Hermann Schmidt 




[ 908 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 909 ] 



Ningyang Dong zhenren yuxian ji i|§ PH M R A 5S fill IS 

16 fbls. 

By Lu Zhaowen ca. 1238 

308 (fasc. 160) 

“Encounters with Immortals of the Congealed Yang Zhenren Dong.” This is a 
chronicle of the career of the otherwise unknown Dong Shouzhi H xf ^ (1160-1227). 
Dong was a Jurchen who adopted a Chinese name and became a military man. He 
was chronically ill until he was converted and became cured at the age of thirty-five. 
From then on, he led an eventful fife as a Taoist monk in the western Shaanxi and 
eastern Gansu areas. After a short summary (ia-2a) of the whole story, Lu Zhaowen, 
otherwise unknown, narrates chronologically the most significant events of Dong’s 
life. Most of these events are encounters with the three immortals Zhongli Quan, 
Lu Dongbin, and Liu Haichan, who appear either alone or in pairs, imparting 
medicine or talismans, instruction and poems, sometimes speaking from the void and 
sometimes appearing in person to perform miracles. 

It is noteworthy that Lu Dongbin is the least prominent of the three. On the 
other hand, the hagiographic data on Liu Haichan are especially interesting; they 
form the first substantial account of him before the official Quanzhen Lit biography, 

173 Jinlitm zhenzong ji, a few years later. Although famous since the eleventh century 
as a disciple of Chen Tuan and a neidan ^ master (see Dongxuan bilu 8.90), Liu 
Haichan’s legend appears in developed form only by the late Jurchen Jin period 
(1115-1234). Some of the information also differs from both the Quanzhen texts and 
early sources such as, notably, the two inscriptions Liu Haichan xianji PI $5 fill M 
(1116; cf. Chen Yuan, Daojiajinshi liie , 328-30) and Chuang Haichan tangyishi keji fjlj 
MaH (1148; Daojiajinshi liie, 1010). According to Wang Chongyang’s 
poems, Liu hailed from Yan (also the place named in the later standard version of 
his life), while the inscriptions place his origins in Qin. In the present text, he says him- 
self that he came from Ruicheng j^M (southern Shanxi, very near Lu Dongbin’s 
birthplace); he also has a “yellow face,” a trait unique to this account. 

The narrative is in a matter-of-fact style; it evokes a popular following that prob- 
ably mingled with the more articulate Quanzhen movement after Dong’s death. The 
transmission of the Tao from Liu Haichan to Dong is mentionned in 174 Jinlian 
zhenzong xianyuan xiangzhuan 17b, and a Ningyang wanshou gong , 

originally founded by Dong, was active in Longzhou IH'J'H (western Shaanxi) until 
the late Ming. 

Vincent Goossaert 



3.A.6.C Mountain and Temple Monographs 

Maoshan zhi LU 

33 juan 

Compiled ca. 1330 by Liu Dabin hao Yuxu zi 5 ( 8 ^; prefaces by Zhao 

Shiyan (1324), Wu Quanjie (1327), and the compiler (1328) 

304 (fasc. 153-158) 

“Chronicle of Maoshan.” This work was compiled on the initiative of Wu Quan- 
jie— who had first approached Wang Daomeng IJIjg, the forty-forth Maoshan 
patriarch— and, finally, his successor, Liu Dabin. Wu, as the archpatriarch ( xuanjiao 
da zongshi £ $ 1 ^ n? fi ), presided over Taoism in the South China region, and saw in 
this work the reward for his own efforts and those of his predecessor, Zhang Liusun 
ijgjjg to obtain imperial support and special favors for the Taoist community on 
Maoshan. It took thirteen years to complete the chronicle. Liu Dabin, who meanwhile 
had fallen ill, had charged his disciples with collecting material, but completion of the 
work was delayed as supplement after supplement was included. Thus we even find 
a memorandum by Liu Dabin on a jinlu zhai jfc M 'M held in 1330 on behalf of the 
empire (4.i8b-i9a). 

The chronicle includes official historical documents, a section on the legend of 
the Mao brothers, a description of the mountain’s topography with its natural sites, 
a section on bibliography, another on the lineage of Maoshan patriarchs in the form 
of biographies, the lives of those immortals and famous Taoists who in the course of 
history had lived on Maoshan, a description of the local flora, reproductions of numer- 
ous inscriptions on steles at monasteries and other sanctuaries, and finally a section 
containing poetry and miscellanea. 

Apart from the rich documentary material from a wide range of historical sources 
used in the chronicle, Liu drew on 1016 Zhen’gao and on a Maoshan ji IF [ 1 | §2 in four 
juan by Fu Xiao fffl? and Zeng Xun Hf&J, dated 1150 (now lost), which treated mainly 
the topography and the buildings of Maoshan. The twelve sections constituting the 
work were originally divided into fifteen juan. 

Liu Dabin was not the only one who contributed to the first version of this chron- 
icle: at the end of the text we find a postface written in 1320 by Zhao Mengfu 
(1254-1322) for an illustrated work ordered by Liu Dabin on the Shangqing tradition 
(Shangqing chuanzhen tu f# H )■ There Zhao presents himself as the author of 
the biographies that accompanied the portraits of the forty-five patriarchs of Maoshan . 
Presumably Liu included these biographies, if not the portraits, in his Maoshan zhi. 
The eulogies {zan f$) appended in die chronicle to all these biographies (juan 10-12) 
are by Yu Ji iMM (1271-1348) and are also found in his Daoyuan xuegu lu 45 - The cal- 



1 



[ 9 io ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



ligraphic rendering of the whole text was finally the responsibility of Zhang Yu M PM 
(1277-1348; see Pingjin guan jianzang ji shuji i.na-b; CGF 247-50). In this form the 
work was printed twice: for the first time during the Yuan (1279-1368), and the second 
time, with an additional preface by Hu Yan fifjft , in 1423. No later edition reproduced 
Zhang Yu’s calligraphy and the original illustrations. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Lu Renlong, “ Daozang ben Maoshm zhi ”; Xu Jianxun, “ Maoshan zbi ji qi banben chutan.” 

U rsula -A ngelika Cedzich 

Xiyue Huashan zhi ffi JR ^ I_L| |o 

23 fols. 

By Wang Chuyi , zi Ziyuan -f $3 , hew Lianfeng yishi preface 

by Liu Dayong glj j^R\,zi Qizhi (1183) 

307 (fasc. 160) 

“Monograph on the Western Peak.” Huashan, the mountain of the title, is one of 
the five sacred mountains. The author sojourned on the Lotus Peak, one of the central 
summits of Huashan, whence his hao, “Recluse of the Lotus Peak.” The Taoist of the 
Quanzhen jk lR school and author of 1152 Tungang ji, Wang Chuyi (1142-1217), lived 
during the same period under the Jin dynasty, but his well-documented biography 
shows that he had no connection with the Lotus Peak. 

Liu Dayong states in his preface that the author based his work on older mono- 
graphs such as the Huashan ji lj§ |Jj |H and the “Tujing BfS” (a lost Huazhou tujing 
¥ 'i'll 111 IS is quoted in the text) and that he collected anecdotes on the mountain from 
such ancient works as the 294 Liexian zhuan attributed to Liu Xiang §?!j foj . Moreover, 
the text comprised “over seventy pian H concerning the peaks, caverns, monasteries, 
natural products, relics, immortals, and so on, of the Huashan” (preface). This descrip- 
tion does not accord with the present version; it is probable, therefore, that our text 
is incomplete. This impression is reinforced by the fact that a later monograph, the 
Huayuezhi Iji JR quotes (cf. 1.23a, 45b; 3.3b) a Xiyue Huanshan zhi, but the quota- 
tions in question are missing in the present version. 

The text includes two prefaces by Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang dynasty (r. 712- 
756), the second of which is only the first section of a stele (for the complete text, see 
“Xiyue Taihua shan beixu,” in Quan Tang wen 41). The 421 Dengzhen yinjue quotation 
(6b) cannot be found in the extant version of this work in the Daozang. Similarly, the 
source of one story is wrongly given as the Liexian zhuan (5b-6a); it was in 

fact excerpted from the Shenxian zhuan The latter is also the origin of a pas- 

sage further on in the text (8b-9a). The “old poem” (2a) is by Han Yu ff# (768-824; 
cf. Quan Tang shi 3789). Two short passages (2i.b-2a) reassemble S99 Dongtianfudi 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 911 ] 



yuedu mingshanji 3b and 6b. The couplet attributed to Du Fu ft fj? (712-770) on 21b 
is unidentified. 

Denis Allistone 



Meixian guan ji $5 fill Id 
26 fols. 



Ca. 1296 
600 (fasc. 331) 

“Records of the Monastery of the Immortal Mei [Fu fg ] .” The present compilation 
should be dated 1296, since the date given in die text— “second year of Zhenyuan M 
7C” (9b) —must be an error for “Yuanzhen ft M .” 

The work has been compiled from constituent parts. Its first part, the “Meixian 
shishi $ 5 filial ff” (True History of the Immortal Mei; ia-9b) by Yang Zhiyuan 
flWaiS (A- 1082) from the Meixian guan in Fengcheng ||$C district (Jiangxi), 
gives an account of the life of Mei Fu, who lived under Wang Mang (r. A.D. 9-25; 
ia-6b has been adopted almost verbatim from Han shu 67.2917 ff.). Mei finally 
obtained immortality and ascended into Heaven from Mount Feihong Jf| $§ |_L[ , 
which was afterward renamed Meixian shan f§ fit ill (6a-9a; strongly abridged cita- 
tion in T.ZTT i4.i4b-i5a). The last paragraph (9a-b) of this first part (in which the 
above-mentioned date appears) is— although not marked as such— a later addition 
that also describes the condition of the monastery (occupied by Buddhists) in the late 
thirteenth century. 



The second part (9b-nb) consists of various inscriptions on steles, one of which 
is dated 1270. Pages 11b— 15b contain the application for canonization, in which Yang 
Zhiyuan played an active part, and the bestowal of the titles Shouchun zhenren # # 
Ot X (in 1082; cf. Songchao da zhaoling ji Abp uil 136.6b) and Shouchun liyin 
j£|H zhenren (in 1132) for Mei Fu. 

The final part consists of a hymn in praise of Mei, as well as numerous poems about 
the mountain named after him and the monastery there. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Li Junqing, “'Meixian guanji kaobian.” 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 



Jinhua Chisong shan zhi ^ ft f£ ill 

2 juan 

By Ni Shouyue flnitfff'J, zi Zhuquan Yl H ; second half of the thirteendi century 
601 (fasc. 331) 

“Monograph on Mount Jinhua.” This mountain is linked to the legend of Chisong 
zi and to that of Huang Chuping (whose zi was also Chisong zi) and 



1 




[ pi 2 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3 .A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 913 ] 



his brother Huang Chuqi MSHS • According to the text (5b), Chisong shan UU 
is another name for Jinhua. The work itself can be dated to the end of the Southern 
Song (1127-1279); the author (about whom we have litde information), a Taoist of 
Mount Jinhua JfcMlU, lived at the beginning of the Yuan (1279-1368) dynasty (see 
Jinhua youlu 2b). 

The monograph seems to have been reconstructed from local sources, parts of 
which had already been lost at the time the work was undertaken (see preface, ia). It 
includes a biography of the brothers Huang that tries to give a historical background 
to their legend by mentioning honorific tides they received during die Southern 
Song. This biography is followed by a description of the mountain that starts with an 
account of the alchemical tradition and of deposits of cinnabar, then offers a physical 
description of the mountain (caverns, peaks, rivers, and streams), and ends with an 
account of the monasteries. Among the latter, special attendon is paid to the Baoji 
guan if JutH or Chisong gong (3a-i2b). Seven biographies of Taoists of the 

area, chronologically arranged, figure in the text (i2b-i6b). The majority of these 
figures are famous for having been received at court during the Southern Song or for 
having played an important role in the Taoist history of the region. The work contains 
some anomalies: according to the text (16a), Zhu Zhichang 4 £□ was the forty-first 
patriarch of Maoshan; 304 Maoshan zhi 12.11a speaks of the irregularity of the seces- 
sion of Maoshan patriarchs and gives the name of Wang Zhixin HcJ'L'. 

Three imperial edicts are included in the monograph (i6b-i8a): the first, dated 
1099, confers the tide of Chisong zi lingxu zhenjun on Chisong 

zi, the immortal of antiquity. The second and third edicts, dated 1189 and 1262, both 
concern honorific tides conferred upon the Huang brothers. A list of steles of Mount 
Jinhua is included (i8a-i9b) but without the text. Four tides ofTaoist texts preserved 
in various temples are found at the end. Two of these works are still extant (18s Chisong 
zi zhongjiejing and 1167 Taishang ganying pian). The Zhifu zhai congshu Jlf H If 
edition and the present text are identical. 

Denis Allistone 

Xiandu zhi 111 ] SIS 

2 juan 

By Chen Xingding Pit f 1 / 1 , zi Ciyi jtfc — ■; edited by Wu Mingyi ^ ljfj.il, zi 

Zhongyi preface dated 13+8 

602 (fasc. 331) 

“Topography of [Mount] Xiandu.” The preface was probably written by Wu Ming- 
yi, who like Chen was a Taoist residing on Mount Xiandu (Jinyun MM county, Zhe- 
jiang). It mentions Zhao Siqi i| |jnj jfi ( zi Xuyi /* — ) because in 1320 he was the first to 
receive an imperial decree (signifying official recognition) from the Yuan (1279-1368) 



court to administer the Yuxu gong TlJhHIj temple on this mountain (i.9a-b). 

The text deals with the topography, religious buildings, and flora of the mountain, 
as well as with persons who obtained immortality and other outstanding people as- 
sociated with the mountain. In addition there is a fist of inscriptions and the text of 
poems and inscriptions by a large number of scholars. 

Hans-Hermtmn Schmidt 

Tiantai shan zhi T. n ill /£ 

21 fols. 

Compiled in 1368 

603 (fasc. 332) 

“Monograph on Mount Tiantai.” This work is a compilation of the early Ming 
(1368-1644) dynasty (for the date, see 10a). It includes an introduction, where the 
author links the Tiantai traditions to those of the Shangqing. This is followed by four 
sections on peaks, caverns, rivers, streams, and, finally, ending with famous monas- 
teries. The most important of these was the Tongbo guan flilffilS, founded in 711 in 
honor of Sima Chengzhen on Mount Tongbo ill , under which was situated 
the Cavern-Heaven ( dongtian ft^) of the Golden Court, over which reigned the 
immortal Wangzi Qiao to- 

The “Stele on Tongbo guan” (iob-i3b) is dated 748. The author, Cui Shang U f£j , 
was an official in the Department of Sacrifice (cf. Xin Tang shu 72B.2736). Th tjimcie 
linlang includes a truncated copy of the inscription, based on a rubbing of 

the original. 

The “Record on the Reconstitution of the Taoist Library” (i3b-i5a), dated 1010 and 
written by the scholar Xia Shu MM (984-1050), recounts how the collection ofTaoist 
books was transported to Hangzhou in 985, where they were copied. They were later 
returned to Tiantai for preservation. 

The “Record on the Restoration of the Tongbo guan” (i5a-i8b), by Cao Xun W |jj 
(d. 1174), is dated 1168. It describes the huge construction work under the direction of 
Shi Baozhang that was finally completed in 1167. 

The last pages of the monograph comprise poems by famous poets— including Li 
Bo ^ 0 (701-762) and Luo Yin if H (833-909) -inspired by Mount Tiantai, as well 
as some short notes on the secularization of certain monasteries or on their links to 
the Tongbo guan during the early Ming. 

Denis Allistone 




[ 914 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 

Longrui guan Tuxue Tangming dongtian tujing 

4 fols. 

By Ye Shu Hflg; 1114 

604 (fasc. 332) 

“Monograph on the Cavern-Heaven Yangming, the Cavern of Yu the Great, and 
on the Longrui Guan.” This is a text composed of quotations concerning the legend 
of Yu the Great, in the kingdom of Yue, excerpted from diverse books. The mono- 
graph also deals with the history of the monastery Longrui guan tgifft II in Guiji # 
ff . Th cs99 Dongtian judiyuedu mingshanji by Du Guangting affirms that Guiji is 
the Cavern-Heaven Yangming of Supreme Mystery ® H Bjj ?|I| ^ . This designation 

accords with our text, which quotes as its source the Guishan boyu [shun] jing ®lL| S 
(ib). According to 969 7 iantan Wangwu shun shengjiji (preface), the latter work 
(now lost) once formed part of the Taoist canon. 

The text has been attributed to Li Zonge (964-1012), probably the reason 

the bibliographical chapters of the Song shi (204B.5156) list a Yangming dongtian tujing 
$0 RM ?|3J HIS in fifteen juan under his name. The same work also considers Li as the 
author of the Yuezhou tujing jli [fil %§•_ in nine juan, a book that is also mentioned in 

our text (3b). The date of the work and the name of the author, however, are clearly 
indicated at the end of our text. The author. Ye Shu, a native of Yuezhou and a jinshi 
)1±, later served as assistant lecturer in the Wei prefecture in Shandong. 

The Longrui guan was built on the site of the ancient temple Houshen guan fjijojj 
U, according to the “Tang Longrui guan ji /Sflf^Ugg” stele (see Liang Zhe jinshi 
zhi 2.13b). The name Houshen guan was changed to Huaixian guan fgflljtf under the 
Liu Song (420-479), at the request of the Taoist Kong Lingchan The Dao- 

xue zhuan quoted in SDZN 2.7b, states that the monastery was constructed 

under the emperor Mingdi (465-471), next to the cavern of Yu the Great. Our text 
indicates the date of its founding as 705, but according to the stele, its second recon- 
struction took place that year. It is only since 714, however, after the observance of a 
jiao SI celebrated by Ye Fashan, that the monastery was known as Longrui guan. 
The Cavern-Heaven Yangming is the cave where the books used by Yu the Great for 
controlling the floods were hidden (3b). 

There is an identical edition of the text in Luo Zhenyu’s Yujian zhai congshu 3£fg 
it •• According to the author, the text formed part of the Song canon. 

Denis Allistone 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 91 s ] 

Siming dongtian danshan tu yongji [ZH HJJ jf“l zL: fj- til [fit! W 

36 fols. 

By Zeng Jian zi Zibo S ; ca. 1362 

605 (fasc. 332) 

The “Collection of Poems on and Descriptions of the Cavern-Heaven Siming and 
the Cinnabar Mountain.” This work comprises texts from different periods on Mount 
Siming 0 Ejfj [_L| in Zhejiang. The collection, compiled toward the end of the Yuan 
(12751-1368) dynasty, can be dated approximately on the basis of two internal dates: 
1362 (11a) and 1361 (13a). 

The author, Zeng Jian of Linchuan, was a contemporary of Wei Su )a ^ ( zi Taipu 
;RfH, 1303-1372), author of two important texts in the collection. Both Zeng and Wei 
were disciples of Wu Cheng (1249-1333). 

The preface by Zeng Jian, like Du Guangting’s S99 Dongtian fudiyuedu ming- 
shanji, identifies Mount Siming as the Ninth Cavern-Heaven. It also mentions two 
illustrations (tu @J ) of the mountain by Xue Yifu which are, however, missing 

from the present version. 

The first section of the collection is an ancient description of the mountain ascribed 
to Mu Hua Tfclji (zi Xuanxu ^1$), with a commentary by He Zhizhang MfcUM 
(659-744). Our text places Mu Xuanxu in the Tang (618-907) dynasty (ia), although 
he was a well-known scholar of the Jin period (265-420). In fact, the main text cannot 
be of the Jin dynasty, since it mentions the names of Taoists posterior to this period 
(such as Fan Yan j&M and Ying Ze 4a-b). Although Mu’s authorship of this 
part can be contested, it is nevertheless possible that he was the author of a monograph 
on the mountain, since the Buddhist monk Zanning f?ft¥ (919-1000) quotes a 
Siming shan ji HElJjlllgE by Mu Xuanxu in his Sunpu Was - The authenticity of He 
Zhizhang’s commentary, however, is almost beyond doubt, since during the Northern 
Song (960-1127) he was known to have written a preface to a Xuanxu zhi % iM iS (see 
779 Tang Ye zhenren zhuan 16b). He also called himself Siming kuangren H3 £E A • 

The description of the mountain is followed by two short biographies (6b-7a) of 
the immortals Liu Wang (Han) and Kong You -fL-ffi (Southern Qi). The “In- 
scription on Siming shan |Z3 BR [if” and the “Record of the Boshui guan [=3 /R fjj ” (9a- 
11a) are by Wei Su and were written at the request of Wu Guogong disciple 

of Mao Yongzhen di ZK jii . The latter, a Taoist of the Sanhua yuan on Mount 

Longhu nlf/Elil, had sojourned in the Boshui guan for a long period of time (11b). 
In this context, the text draws an analogy to Wu Zhenyang (hao Hunpu zi 

of the Southern Song (1127-1279) dynasty: he was a disciple of the Thirtieth 
Heavenly Master, Zhang Jixian MM 9b (1092-1126), and also a Taoist of the Sanhua 
yuan who was linked to the Boshui guan (10a). The Longhu shan is mentioned often 
in our text, which suggests that the Taoism of Mount Siming followed the Heavenly 



[ 9i6 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



Master tradition. Mao Yongzhen was also responsible for the construction of a dwell- 
ing, the Shitian shanfang 5 FH LU M , which was situated next to the Siyu guan 
H on Mount Siming (cf. the preface by Zcng Jian, na-i3a). The text ends with poems 
(i3a-36a) on the mountain by authors of different periods, ranging from the Tang to 
end of the Yuan dynasty (1279-1368). 

A commentary on the text ascribed to Mu Xuanxu was written by the Ming Scholar 
Huang Zongxi (1610-1695) in his Siming shun zbi. The commentary points out numer- 
ous errors in the Mu Xuanxu description of the mountain. 

Denis Allistone 

Nanyue zongshengji 

27 fols. 

606 (fasc. 332) 

“General Account of die Scenery of the Southern Peak.” This tide is misleading, 
since the present text gives only the twenty-eight entries on Taoist establishments in 
the second juan of the Nanyue zongshengji by Chen Tianfu Pifl EH ^ . The original work 
consists of three juan (as reprinted in the Lilou congshu BUjj jjfll, which is based 
on a Song (960-1279) edition and preserves its format of twenty lines with twenty 
characters each; see also the Buddhist canon edition listed in the general bibliography 
in volume 3): juan 1 deals with topography, local cults, and so on; juan 2 is about 
Buddhist and Taoist religious buildings and the flora and fauna of the mountain; and 
juan 3 has biographies of hermits and eminent Buddhists and Taoists from the Tang 
(618-907) to the Song period. 

In the preface (dated 1163) to his work, Chen, himself a resident of the Southern 
Peak, says that he mainly combined four existing records of the Hengshan (tj ill for 
his compilation: a Buddhist and a Taoist record, and two recent texts, Shenggaiji $§ 
H M and Hengshan ji Hi ill IE- 

The history of the Lilou congshu edition of the text is described in the preface by Ye 
Dehui (dated 1907). Different editions of Chen’s work are discussed by Mo 

Boji in Wushiwan juan lou qunshu bawen 3.i82a-i84b. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Wudang jisheng ji iH # IE M 

32 fols. 

By Luo Tingzhen Id MSI; hao Yunlu qiaoweng it M Id H ; Yuan (1279-1368) 

963 (fasc. 609) 

“Record of the Scenery of Wudang” This title comprises a collection of descriptive 
poems by a single author. Nothing is known about Luo Tingzhen. The name given 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 917 ] 

for his place of origin, Longxing lu corresponds to the appellation used for 

the region of Nanchang nH H (Jiangxi) in Yuan times. The poems describe in simple 
diction the scenery, monuments, and remarkable sites on Wudang shan xH# ill- 

Kristofer Schipper 

Dadi dongtian ji j|s| IE 
3 juan 

By Deng Mu fjlft , zi Muxin (1247-1306) 

782 (fasc. 559) 

“Records of the Cavern-Heavens of Great Purity.” This text describes in detail 
Mount Dadi, thirty-fourth of the thirty-six dongtian which lies to the south- 

west of Hangzhou in Zhejiang; it also includes fifty biographies of mountain dwellers. 
The author was a recluse who retired after the fall of the Song to the famous Taoist 
establishment, the Dongxiao gong (IE if , on the mountainside. 

The text is preceded by three prefaces. The third is dated 1305 and signed Shen 
Duofu }§, zi Jieshi, abbot of the Dongxiao gong. In this preface, Shen says that 
asked his disciple Meng Jixu to collaborate on the compilation of this text, 

which he entitled Dongxiao tuzhi jlsjff HicL Shen also draws attention to the fact 
that a former work devoted to Mount Dadi — the [Dadi] Zhenjing lu ( Al if? ) III Fft , 

written in 1118 by the daoshi Tang Zixia /K \F ® — was already a lost book, and that an 
expanded edition published between 1234 and 1236 was also lost. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Dongxiao tuzhi; Fu Lo-shu, “A forgotten Chinese philosopher. 

Pauline Bentley Koffler 

Gu Louguan ziyun yanqing ji li 18 ® ^ M tfe 

3 juan 

By Zhu Xiangxian yfc, zi Yixu sou 'lM ; soon after 1308 
957 (fasc. 605) 

“Collection from the Hall of Purple Clouds and Abundant Blessing of the Ancient 
Louguan.” This work is a compilation comprising stele and other inscriptions con- 
cerning the Louguan 41 H, for the period ranging from the Tang (618-907) to the 
Yuan (1279-1368) dynasties, with, at the end, poems by authors of the Tang, Song, 
and the Yuan. The name of the hall constructed in 1242 (1.16b) was inspired by a phe- 
nomenon that took place in 741, when purple clouds appeared indicating the location 
of sacred texts (cf. 770 Hunyuan shengji 8.32b). The collection is posterior to 1308, the 
last date it mentions (2.23a). 



[ 918 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 

There are some important documents concerning the Louguan of the Tang period: 
the Record of the Zongsheng guan zrcSEItS” (i.ia-4b; the name Louguan was 
changed to Zongsheng guan in 625); a biography of Yin Wencao by Yuan Banqian 
Jt^i 1 (621-714), engraved upon a stele in 717 (i.4b-9b; the text is reproduced in 
the Jinshi cuibicm 7i.i8b-22b); a stele by Dai Xuan Witifc in honor of Laozi and the 
Louguan (i.9b-ija). 

The Yuan documents deal mainly with the Quanzhen ^ jR school of Taoism. The 
“Record on the Reconstruction of the Louguan” (1. i3a-i8b), by Li Ding and 
dated 1263, was engraved upon a stele in 1296. It recounts work undertaken for the 
reconstruction of the Louguan, which had been completely destroyed during the war 
that took place between 1232 and 1233, toward the end of the Jin dynasty. The recon- 
struction, which began in 1236 under the direction of Li Zhirou (zt Qianshu 

1188-1266) and at the behest of the sixth patriarch Yin Zhiping was 

finished in 1242. This text also extols the reappearance of the Guanyin ziWi^-f, an 
apocryphal work ascribed to Yin Xi f?U and “rediscovered” by Sun Ding Mfe in 
Zhejiang. It is there that a certain Zhang Zhongcai ( 4 * Z" obtained the text and pre- 
sented it to Yin Zhiping in 1233. In 1282, Zhu Xiangxian also wrote about the reappear- 
ance of the Guanyin zi in his Wenshi zhenjing chushiji £ lR $? (Shoushan ge 
^ LU IW edition, zi bu g| 5 , “yuanben” Jg#). The “Record” also indicates that the 
honorific title of Shuntian xingguo fIJi E PI Nil was given to the Zongsheng guan in 988 
(1.14a). This was the name of the highest altar (tan if ) in the ritual revealed to Zhang 
Shouzhen vF R by the divinity Yisheng baode zhenjun #0 5 ? R during the 

early Song (cf. 128s Yisheng baode zhuan 1.3a and 9s6 Zhongnan shan shuojing tai lidai 
zhenxian beiji 17a). 

The reconstruction of die Louguan and the Guanyin zi form the main topic in most 
of the texts preserved in the present collection. The biography of Li Zhirou (2.8b-i2a) 
by Li Daoqian $ iM nd differs considerably from the one in 973 Ganshui xianyuan lu 
(7.i6b-2ob). Four texts of the collection, of which one is a preface to a Louguan edi- 
tion of the Guanyin zi (2.1a— ib), are by Zhu Xiangxian. The collection also includes 
a biography of Yin Zhiping by Jia Yu M M (2.3a-7b) and texts by Du Daojian 
( 3 .ia- 5 a),ShiTingyuS 5 fi (2.23-33), Zhao Fulfill (zi Renfu CS; 2. 7 b-8b), and 
WangShoudao lEil (2.2ia-23a). 

Denis Allistone 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 919 ] 

Song dong Taiyi gong beiming 

5 fols. 

By Hu Meng MU, zi Riyong 0 ; 984 

965 (fasc. 610) 

Song xi Taiyi gong beiming 

5 fols. 

By Song Shou 5 j 5 $§, zi Gongchui 4 a Iff; 1029 

966 (fasc. 610) 

Song zhong Taiyi gong beiming 

5 fols. 

ByLti Huiqing Jifii^ffi; 1074 

967 (fasc. 610) 

These three steles commemorate three palaces constructed during the Northern 
Song (960-1127) dynasty as cult centers to receive the stellar divinity Taiyi js. Z. (Great 
One). The cult to Taiyi was instituted in the reign of Wudi (140-87 B.c.) of the Han 
dynasty (see Shiji 12456). 

In 981, the Taoist astrologer Chu Zhilan ft HU taught divinatory techniques (Song 
shi 461.13500) based on the authority of a work entitied Wufu taiyi (see 

Yuhai 100. 6b). This work mentions ten Taiyi divinities and explains that when one of 
these traverses the five palaces, peace and security are obtained in the corresponding 
geographical fields (fenye In this work, both the order in which the divinity 

traverses the five palaces and the corresponding^wjyr are identical with the account in 
another work, partially apocryphal, ascribed to Wang Ximing T. EPj , the Taiyi jinjing 

shijing 5-3a. 

The five palaces are represented by four trigrams placed around the center, which 
is one of the palaces. The divinity travels through these palaces, changing one of them 
every forty-five years and accomplishing a complete voyage through all five in two 
hundred and twenty-six years. This voyage is undertaken in five directions, in the fol- 
lowing order: qian (northwest), gen H. (northeast), xun H (southeast), kun ftf 1 
(southwest), and the center. 

The Yuhai indicates that according to Chu Zhilan, the divinity would pass through 
the southeast palace (xun), which corresponds to the field Suzhou M j'H in 984. Chu 
therefore suggested that a palace be built in the southeast of Kaifeng, at Sucun M f'f, 
the name resembling that of the fenye. This first stele, by the Hanlin scholar Hu Meng 
(915-986), was erected to celebrate the building of the eastern Taiyi gong. 

Forty-five years later, a western palace was built in the southwest of the capital. The 
scholar Song Shou (991-1040) was charged, by Zhang Shixun jjfldb 'M (964-1094), 
to write the text for a second stele (966 Songxi Taiyi gong beiming; cf. Yuhai 100.23b). 



[ 920 ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 921 ] 



As early as 1071, we find the proposal of the astrologer Zhou Cong |S| to con- 
struct aTaiyi gong in the center of Kaifeng, not far from the monastery Jixi guan HfiJ 
IS, in order to honor the divinity, whose arrival was expected in 1074. Emperor Shen- 
zong acceded to this request and ordered Lu Huiqing (1032-1111), author of 686 
Daode zhenjing zhuan, to write the text of a third stele to commemorate the event (967 
Song zhong Taiyi gong beiming). Shenzong then entrusted Chen Jingyuan with the 
administration of the central palace (cf. 71s Daode zhenjing ccmgshi zuanwei kaiti kewen 
shu 1.5a). About twenty Taoists were selected to live there, and once a year a novice 
was ordained. Taoists who had the honor of being invited also sojourned in the other 
two palaces and celebrated rituals periodically. 

The cult of the ten divinities of Taiyi was different from that of the divinities of the 
Nine Palaces (the jiugong guishen A'Ij H' W ). The latter cult was first instituted, at 
the suggestion of Su Jiaqing if H® , during the Tang dynasty in 744. It is linked to 
the ancient speculations on the magic square: the “marvelous tortoise” formed by the 
numbers one to nine placed in a square around the center, the number five, in such a 
way that the sum of each horizontal or diagonal row totaled fifteen. Both the names 
of the divinities and their passage through the palaces differ in the two systems. More- 
over, the two cults were separate during the Song dynasty (960-1279) : the divinities of 
the Nine Palaces received offerings of animal origin (meat, poultry, etc.), whereas such 
offerings were strictly forbidden for the ten divinities. An initiative by the inspector of 
sacrifices. An Ding , in 1092, to unify the two cults was rejected by the minister 
of rites (cf. Song shi 103.2508 and Song huiyaojigao 1:756). 

In 1118, forty-five years after the construction of the central Taiyi gong, the name 
of the monastery Longde gong !!(.“§ was changed to Bei Taiyi gong 
A specialist of the Taiyi techniques, the Taoist Zhang Xubo E= 3 , was appointed 
administrator of this northern palace (cf. LZTT 51.1b and Wenxian tongkao 80.743). 

The custom of building palaces to welcome the Taiyi divinities came to an end dur- 
ing the Southern Song dynasty when, in 1208, Emperor Ningzong rejected a proposal 
to construct a Taiyi gong in Hangzhou (cf. Tuhai 100.29b). 

Denis Allistone 

Longjiao shun ji It ft ll( 12 

25 fols. 

Later part of the twelfth century 

968 (fasc. 610) 

“Records of Mount Dragon Horn.” This work consists of a collection of stele in- 
scriptions, most of which relate to this mountain in Shanxi, which originally was called 
Yangjiao shan ft ft | 1 ( (Mount Goat Horn). It was at the foot of this mountain that, 
in 620 A. d . , Laozi appeared to a villager named Ji Shanxing ft H ff and told him that 



he, Laozi, was in fact the ancestor of Emperor Tang Gaozu (r. 618-626) and the divine 
protector of the newly founded dynasty (compare 774 Tulong zhuan 5.na-i4b and 770 
Hunyuan shengji 8.4a-6b). 

The latest date in the present collection is 1171. The Fushan xianzhi of 

1935 (40.26a) contains the text of an inscription by the Quanzhen ft: R master Mao 
Hui ftH! for the renovation of the Tiansheng gong (see below), dated 1192. 

If the present work were later than this date, it is probable that this document would 
have been included. 

The first inscription (ia-4b) in the present collection is by Tang Xuanzong (r. 712- 
756). Dated 729, it recalls the appearance of Laozi in 620 and announces the change of 
name for the mountain. The next text (4b-5a) commemorates a great jiao H -offering, 
with a final rite of Casting Dragons ( tou longjian fz pfllfj ), that took place in 713 at the 
Longjiao shan || ft Uj (see page 9b). 

The two following epigraphical texts (5a-7b; 7b-9a) are also by Tang Xuanzong and 
are dated 733 and 739, respectively. These inscriptions do not concern the Longjiao 
shan or the Qingtang guan ® Hf H directly (the latter was the temple that Xuanzong 
had built in 728 on the very spot where Gaozong originally had placed a temple for 
Laozi). Instead, the texts concern different measures taken by the emperor in favor 
of Taoism. The second of these texts, which orders that statues of the dynastic ances- 
tor Laozi are placed in all temples of the empire, is also found in the Quan Tang wen 
3i.9a-iob, albeit with a different title. 

Next, the present work has the text of an inscription (dated 743) commemorating 
the celebration of a Golden Register Retreat (jinlu zhai iiif ) in the Qingtang guan 
by Cui Mingyun The same text has been reproduced in the Jinshi cuibian 

86.6b. 

The “Note on Auspicious Omens” (i3a-i4a) by Li Huan ft 'Jf recalls the periodical 
resurrection— following the rise and decline of Taoism— of the cypress that grew on 
the spot where Laozi appeared. This note was probably written at the time that such 
a miracle happened in the year 881 (see S 93 Lidai chongdaoji 15a; Verellen, “A forgotten 
Pang restoration”). 

The “Stele of the Qingtang guan” (i4a-i8b) by Han Wang is dated 1008. It 
commemorates the restoration of the temple undertaken by the daoshi Liang Zhizhen 
in 1005. In harmony with this pious undertaking, miraculous rains fell and 
the old cypress revived. Next (18b) there is an inscription for the restoration of the 
Sanqing dian ft fit , the Three Pure Ones Hall of the Tiansheng guan TdrifSL This 
text is from mi. 

The “Chongxiu Jia Jun hou dian ji S Rx 1 2 ” (i9b-2ob) dates from 1133 

and was written by Wang Jianzhong ft£! ft , a jinshi ji|i± of the Northern Song 
(960-1127) who lived in retirement under the Jurchen Jin (1115-1234; see Song Tuan 




[ pzz ] 3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 

xuean buyi 6.93). This Jia Jun hou |§ was a local deity to whom 

memorials could be addressed for obtaining rain. The canonization dtle is of the Song 
period. Having been destroyed by lightning in 1148, the Qingtang temple was recon- 
structed once more. A second inscription (“Chongxiu Huachi Jia Jun hou dian ji jft 

Iji /Ul H ill f^Kxnd)” is signed by Tian Wei EB $t and dated 1157. This text is followed 
by six memorials that were presented to the deity, petitions and prayers of thanks for 
rain and snow. One of these memorials contains the date of 1172. The above-men- 
tioned Fushan xianzhi indicates (40.26a) that this temple and its worship still existed 
in modern times. 

Denis Allistone 

Gongguan beiji M ffl .Id 

34 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644) 

972 (fasc. 610) 

“Stele Inscriptions of Temples and Monasteries.” All texts except one in this collec- 
tion date from the Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) and Yuan (1279-1368) dynasties. The name 
of the compiler is unknown. The majority of inscriptions concern the Quanzhen X fla 
order. The last date mentioned is 1256, but the explicit mention of the Yuan dynasty as 
such (page 13a) shows that this compilation dates from after the end of that period. 

The first inscription is by Tao Gu pSHK (903-970). It was written in commemora- 
tion of the restoration of a sanctuary for Xi wang mu at Huishan [nj[[|, also 

called Huizhong shan [U 4 1 ill or Gongshan JU [Jj , in Gansu. According to the legend 
preserved in 291 Mu tianzi zhuan , King Mu of the Zhou gave a banquet in honor of 
the goddess on the banks of Yao 1 % Lake; tradition has it that this lake was on Huishan 
(see Jingzhou zhi 9b). The inscription is dated 968 and has also been recorded in the 
Jinshi cun 5.11a. 

The next inscription is the Chongyang Chengdao gong beiji The 

temple in question was built on the very spot where the founder of the Quanzhen 
order, Wang Chongyang, had his “tomb of the living dead” ( Huosi ren mu 
XM). The temple was built on the initiative of Zhou Quanyang (1145-1288), 

and its name was changed to the present one in 1252. It is likely that the inscription 
dates to that period. 

On page 8a begins the text of the Chijicm Puticm Hucmglu dajiao bei^M^XMM. 
in commemoration of the Great Offering service of the Yellow Register that 
was celebrated by the Quanzhen patriarch Li Zhichang (1193-1256) on the occasion 
of the death of the Mongol Khan Mongke in 1254. 

The Tuan chongxiu Bozhou Taiqmg gong Taiji dian bei 
5 $, an inscription on the restoration of the Taiqing gong Tit'S) in Bozhou, Laozi’s 



3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography [ 923 ] 

birthplace, is by Wang El® (1190-1273) and must have been written around 1256. 
The temple was originally built in 586 and later rebuilt by the Quanzhen patriarch 
Zhang Zhijing who served in this office from 1256 to 1270. 

The inscription for the restoration of the Great Universal Tianqing guan at Zhong- 
du ( Zhongdu shifang Da Tianchang guan chongxiu beiji 

IB; i8a-2ib) gives a description of this prestigious Taoist center, which was founded 
in the Kaiyuan era (713-741). Zhongdu was the capital of the Jin, on the site of today’s 
Peking. The restoration took place from 1167 to 1174. The author, Zheng Zidan f|ft f 

(1126-1180), was a scholar of the Hanlin Academy. 

Next (26a-28b) there is the important inscription commemorating the comple- 
tion and printing of the Taoist canon of the Jin dynasty, the Da Jin Xuandu baozang 
The inscription, by Wei Boxiao a Hanlin academician (see 

Zhongzhou ji 4.15b), must have been written around 1193. The work of compilation 
and engraving, done on the basis of the printing blocks of the Zhenghe Wanshou 
daozang jfXWiMMW, that the Jin had brought to their capital from Kaifeng, was 
undertaken around 1190 by the abbot Sun Mingdao (see VDL 45-46), who 

also celebrated two Great Offering ( jiao ft ) services in 1190 and obtained the recovery 
of the mother of the emperor. Two inscriptions, one by Zhu Lan zEM ( jinshi IS it 
in 1187; see Zhongzhou ji 7.4b) and one by Dang Huaiying (1134-1211), com- 

memorate these events. A last document, the Zhongjing chongxiu shifang Shangqing 
gong ji XXMi&XXh'Mjjni, is an undated inscription by Yunsun Chvmfii Sf 
M , M Hi (i.e., Yu Jiabin XMlS) for the restoration of the Shangqing temple in 
Luoyang. 

Denis Allistone 

Daishi {§ ^ 

18 juan 

By Zha Zhilong SSPH, zi Mingzhi , hao Shaoting fS JjS or ^ ( jinshi Jl± 

1558); 1586 

1472 (fasc. 1092-1096) 

“History of Dai.” This is a book devoted to Taishan fk |i| , the mountain where the 
Feng H and Shan ifif sacrifices had been celebrated by Chinese sovereigns since high 
antiquity. Zha Zhilong (see Zhejiang tongzhi 167.8b) compiled this monograph at the 
behest of his superior Tan Yao M'M when Zha was an official in Shandong in 1586. 

The work had been completed during several months between the summer and 
winter of that year (see the “Gongyi jj ^ ” the compiler’s official statement; ia, 3b). 
In fact, Zha Zhilong had merely supplemented an earlier Taishan zhi ^ fi( If, (Descrip- 
tion of Taishan), whose author is not indicated. It was probably a work of Wang Zi- 
qing fcE from the Jiajing era (1522-1566) before 1554 (see “Gongyi,” ia), to which 



1 



[ 924 ] 3 . A . 7 Collectanea 



3 . A . 7 Collectanea [ 92s ] 



had been added new items, such as the Xiang shut zhi (Incense Tax Register) 

and some literary works written after 1554 (see the “Gongyi,” ia, 17.1a). 

Zha explains that he adopted the appellation Daizong f 5 th for the sacred moun- 
tain because of the antiquity of its traditions going back to the Yellow Emperor. The 
meaning of the character Dai t 5 has given rise to various speculations, discussed in 
Kroll, “Verses from on high,” 229-30. The substitution of shi for zhi ,ef, may be 

explained by an intended analogy with dynastic histories (see the “Fanli,” or compi- 
lation rules, 1 a). 

The book’s contents are divided into fourteen subjects: maps (the sidereal sectors, 
xingye Mi?); topography; the mountain’s rivers; its administrative circumscription; 
the ritual hunting sacrifices; the Feng and Shan ceremonies; nature sacrifices; histori- 
cal sites and monuments; religious or commemorative constructions; edifices; natural 
ressources; the incense tax; good and bad omens; and, finally, literary works relating 
to ascensions. Altogether the book covers more than 600 items. 

In his Gongyi, as well as at the end of the general table of contents, Zha Zhilong 
states that the book was composed of eighteen chapters in seven volumes, and that 
each volume bore one of the seven characters edited, respectively, by a phrase of Zhong- 
yong 4 1 Jit to mark their sequence. 

The book’s edition in the Daozang corresponds roughly to this description, but 
certain texts mentioned are dated later than the Gongyi (11.10b, 17.58a; 18.78b). This 
Daozang edition, the only one available to us, does not seem to be the original edition 
of Zha Zhilong. 

Kwong Hing Foon 



3. A. 7 Collectanea 

3.A.7.a Logia ( Tulu ) 

The Taoists and Confiicians, from the Song (960-1279) period on, adopted the 
Buddhist Tulu form to transmit teachings of great patriarchs and sages and 
adapted it to their own needs. Indeed, until the advent of the monastic organization 
of the Quanzhen ife (ft order, there seems to have been no counterpart to the collective 
teaching sessions that took place in the Chan monasteries and from which most of the 
famous Chan logia derived their materials. 

The subject matter of the logia included in this section varies greatly. Most col- 
lections contain not only spoken words of the patriarchs, but also poetry and writ- 



ten prose. These works are thus in fact rather similar to the collected works that are 
presented below in part 3.A.7.b. Much of Taoist teaching concerned the performance 
of ritual, and this topic takes up an important part of almost all Taoist yulu brought 
together here. 

The Quanzhen yulu, which are closer to the Buddhist model, have not been includ- 
ed here, but are presented in the relevant section within the context of the Quanzhen 
school. 

Chongxu tongmiao sichen Wang xiansheng jiahua lM j® {# M I % 4 ^ IS 

16 fols. 

By Yuan Tingzhi ItjgEfji (fl. 1153) et al. 

1250 (fasc. 996) 

“School Conversations of Palace Attendant Wang, Master of Mystery Penetration 
Vacuity.” Master Wang is Wang Jun alias Wang Wcnqing 2 E f® (1093—1153), the 
founder of the the Five Thunder rites ( wuleifa Hff ji;) of the Shenxiao school 
(see part 3.B.6). Wang obtained his arts from the fire master ( huoshi ) Wang Zi- 

hua tE^IjS (who supposedly lived in the Tang dynasty). Master Wang’s biography 
is recorded in LZTT 53.i6a-2ia and in a long inscription by Yu Ji iMM (1271-1348), 
preserved in his Daoyuan xuegu lu 25.ioa-i3b. Master Wang’s title of Chongxu tong- 
miao xiansheng iM 9 b was conferred by Song Huizhong in 1125. The present 
logia were noted down by his disciples, notably by Yuan Tingzhi (see page ib). The 
conversations concern the rituals of calling up rain and exorcising demon possession 
(sui by the practice of “sublimating generals” (divine helpers) out of the life ener- 
gies of the adept’s own body ( lianjiang W-V$)- Wang recalls his own initiation. Later 
he tells how he was once called upon to produce rain by the emperor but warned by 
his divine master, Wang Zihua, that his task would be difficult, since the drought that 
year had been ordered by Heaven itself. Only the Yellow River would retain plentiful 
water, and only the dragon-king of that river would be able to produce rain. Wang 
therefore ordered his generals to summon rain from the Yellow River, and indeed the 
rain that fell was full of yellow mud (iob-na). The jiahua were intended for 

transmission to his own disciples and descendants. 

The present work is comparable to Wang’s “Qidao baduan jin /jt/f in 

1220 Daofa huiyuan 69 and constitutes a record of the practice and thought of a great 
exorcist. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 




3 . A . 7 Collectanea [ 927 ] 



[ 926 ] 3 . A . 7 Collectanea 



Xujing chonghe xiansheng Xu shenweng yulu l£ p if# f PA (t ^ HI a £$ 

2 juan 

Compiled by Miao Xiyi jsj #|§t in 1131; edited by Zhu Yi AS in 1158; revised by 
Zhu Songqing A AO® in 1187 
1251 (fasc. 997) 

“Recorded Sayings of Xu Shouxin.” Xu Shouxin ^ fa , alias Xu shenweng 
H (1033-1108), was a daoshi of the Tianqing guan AHH temple in Hailing 
Taizhou ^ ']'['[ (Yangzhou, Jiangsu). Having entered the monastery as a servant for 
sweeping the grounds, he memorized 1 Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing, and 
told people’s fortune by quoting one or several words from this scripture; he gave 
people the quotation written on a slip of paper. Those who turned to him to “ask 
for characters” (qiuzi A?) included Emperor Zhizong, who in 1099 questioned 
Xu about his succession (2.12b), and Lin Ling’e ftMM (Lin Lingsu), who asked 
about his career, prior to his appointment at court (2.5a). Even Lu Dongbin is said 
to have visited Xu ( 30s Chunyang dijun shenhua miaotongji 4.4a-b). So great was Xu’s 
fame that shrines were erected in his lifetime to worship him (1.8b; 1.17a). In 1103, 
Huizong conferred on him the honorific title of Xujing chonghe xiansheng /SSf 
fP A A, mentioned in the title of the present work. Invited to court in 1107, together 
with the Maoshan patriarch Liu Hunkang and Heavenly Master Zhang Jixian USUI 
A (1092-1126), Xu died the following year at the capital’s Shangqing zhuxiang gong 
A fit ft temple and received a state funeral. 

After his death, his disciple Miao Xiyi compiled a record of Xu’s remarkable deeds. 
The manuscript was edited and printed by Zhu Yi (preface dated 1158). Later, Zhu 
Songqing, a kinsman of Zhu Yi, revised and reprinted the book while serving at the 
Taizhou prefecture administration (second preface, dated 1187). The work seems to 
have been widely read in Southern Song times; it is recorded as having entered the 
library of You Mao jtM (1124-1193), the Suichu tang (VDL 127). 

The book starts with a short biographical sketch (i.ia-b). The remainder of the 
two juan is taken up entirely by short anecdotes, arranged in a roughly chronologi- 
cal order, about Xu’s prophecies by means of quotations from the Duren jing. Many 
times the characters he wrote had to be analyzed in a rebus-like way before yielding 
their message. Sometimes Xu altered the quotations slightly in order to convey added 
meanings. Xu’s behavior is depicted as thoroughly eccentric, but the donations by his 
visitors were used to rebuild the entire monastery and temple complex. The anecdotes 
often contain interesting insights in the Taoist establishment of the times. 

Kristofer Schipper 



Shangqing Taixuan jianjie lun h M A A M . Im 

11 fols. 

By Hou Shanyuan hao Taixuan zi A; Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) 

1137 (fasc. 767) 

“Discourse Criticizing Past Errors, by the Shangqing [Master] Taixuan.” This work 
contains a series of seven speeches to an assembly of monks on the fundamentals of 
religious practice, with accompanying hymns (song ® ). The text is in pure vernacular 
and in style as well as vocabulary is close to Chan yulu ID IK. A quotation from Zhan g 
Ziyang (Pingshu on 2a confirms the fact that Hou belonged to the Southern 
school, although he lived in Shanxi. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Haiqiong Bo zhenren yulu $7 fS fl fi A lu $& 

4 juan 

By Bo Yuchan S 3£®8 (fl. 1194-1229); edited by Peng Si MWt in 1251; 

printed by Fang Congyi 77 ]*£!§ in 1302 

1307 (fasc. 1016) 

“Sayings of Bo, the Zhenren from Qiongzhou [on Hainan].” In spite of the title, 
the work contains not only the logia of the famous Taoist patriarch of the Southern 
school, but also all kinds of writings and poems by him and others. This medley col- 
lection has, moreover, a number of different compilers. At the end of the book (4.21b) 
there is a colophon by Peng Si, dated 1251, in which he states that he took notes as- 
siduously whenever he met the patriarch and also collected his poems. Peng edited all 
his materials into a collection in four juan and had it printed as a supplement to the 
Haiqiong ji Bo Yuchan’s collected works. Peng’s indications are at variance 

with the work as we have it, as most of its contents were apparently not collected by 
him, but by other disciples. However, his reference to the meditation hall sessions, 
the poems of the patriarch (“ shengtang , xiaocan 's' /J \ ^ ”), and the number of juan 

all tally with the present work’s contents, and the presence of a number of personal 
letters from Bo to Peng reinforce the case that Peng Si edited the collection. 

Juan 1 carries the signature of one of Bo’s other disciples, Xie Xiandao Iff ISM. It 
starts out with the sayings of the patriarch, in discussion with his foremost disciples, 
Peng Si and Liu Yuanchang (ia-i6a). These sayings are followed by the text 

of the memorial written and presented on the occasion of the transmission and ordi- 
nation Bo Yuchan conferred to seven of his disciples in 1218; these disciples include 
Peng, Liu, and Xie, the editor of this chapter. The remainder of the juan contains 
poems. 

Juan 2 was compiled by another disciple, Lin Boqian {[]§§, who signs as head 
of the Tianqing guan ASH temple. The entire chapter deals with questions and 




[ 9 28 ] 3. A. 7 Collectanea 

answers on the subject of liturgy. Lin refers to Bo Yuchan as the patriach ( zushi 
W ) andtoPENG Si as his initiator (dushUffffi). The discussions he noted down took 
place in 1222. 

Juan 3 carries different signatures. It contains the transcripts of a number of sessions 
in the meditation halls of temples at Wuyi shan ^ |JL| and other places, noted down 
by Ye Guxi Jjl th’ as well as by Zhao Shoufu and others (3.1a). One of the 

sessions is dated 1221 (13b). 

Juan 4 is unsigned. It begins with a poem by Bo’s master, the Nanzong patriarch 
Chen Nan, hew Niwan zi ■ It ends with a number of letters written by Bo to 

Peng Si, two of them dated 1217 and 1218, respectively. 

The colophon by Fang Congyi (4.12a) raises several questions. He tells us that he 
obtained a copy of the work from the Tianqing guan, where it was in the possession 
of a daoshi named Jiang (?), and had it printed in 1302. With it came the above- 
mentioned colophon by Peng, which Fang Congyi copied and appended. He refers to 
the work as containing the “Jingxiao dafa a highly secret text. Although 

this ritual is more than once discussed in the present yulu Fang’s exact reference 
cannot be found. 

The life and works of Bo are not well known. It is generally said that his original 
name was Ge Changgeng tSMlM and that he was born in 1194 and died in 1229. There 
are no reliable corroborations, however, of these indications. It is true that no texts 
written by Bo bear dates later than 1229. The birth date, however, is certainly mistaken. 
AlettertoPENG Si dated 1218 (4.16b) is signed by Bo with the appellation Qiongshan 
laoren (the old man of Qiongshan [Hainan]), not a suitable name for a 

young man of twenty-four. Elsewhere, in a poem. Bo Yuchan declares that he had 
reached the age of nine times ten (263.37 Shungqing ji Uftt M [Xiuzhen shishu 41.3a]). 
Other instances show beyond doubt that Bo Yuchan lived to a ripe old age before 
he died around 1230. 

The contents of the yulu, especially in these parts in which his spoken words are 
reproduced, show a lively, at times humorous and caustic, spirit. Many of his remarks 
and criticisms are useful for understanding Taoism in his time. Bo Yuchan had 
far-reaching interests, and his logia cover a wide number of topics. He castigates the 
ever popular 622-623 Beidoujing as a forgery (i.2a-3b). There is a long passage about 
the Manichaeans of Fujian (i.nb-i2a). In another passage, dealing with the shamanic 
cults of Fujian, he affirms that these cults originated with Suotan wang ^fH 3 £ 
(King Satan?). He also mentions the Liishan (aj |JL| school of Fujian in this respect 
(i.8b-9a). 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 



3. A. 7 Collectanea [ 929 ] 

Jingyu xuanwen p & fnl 

5 fols. 

1252 (fasc. 997) 

“Questions of Mystery at Times of Serenity.” This is a short collection of logia by 
the patriarch Bo Yuchan in answer to questions by his foremost disciple, Peng Si. 
The style and subject matter are similar to the first chapter of 1307 Hctiqiong Bo zhen- 
ren yulu; indeed some passages of the present work can also be found there (sa.7 to 
5b.8 correspond to 1307 Bo zhenrenyulu i.i3b.5 to 1.143.4). This overlap is all the more 
remarkable because the Bo zhenren yulu was published by Peng in 1251. It is not clear 
why all the logia of the present volume were not included in that text. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Haiqiong wendaoji [31 jtl Ifc 

23 fols. 

Attributed to Bo Yuchan 2E?®t (fl. 1194-1229); preface by Liu Yuanchang @ 

TuH (A- 1192-1217) 

1308 (fasc. 1016) 

“Enquiring of the Tao to the [the Patriarch] from Qiongzhou on Hainan.” Accord- 
ing to the undated preface by Bo Yuchan’s disciple Liu Yuanchang, the contents of 
this small collection of eight doctrinal texts (including one rhapsody and one didactic 
poem) reflect the instructions he received from the master and later had printed. 
Among these pieces, six concern Inner Alchemy and two— titled, respectively, “Hai- 
qiong jun yinshan wen DSliiM” and “Changqi guangguo ji JtlSIIB”— 

are written in imitation of the Zhuangzi but with a distinct Buddhist Chan slant. 

The most remarkable text in this work is the preface. Here Liu gives a highly 
unconventional portrait of Bo. Although he knows that the patriarch was generally 
thought to hail from Hainan, Liu suspects that Bo came from Hubei (Xiangmian 
MM)- When Liu first met Bo in 1217, the latter claimed to be only twenty-one years 
old. In spite of this young age, Bo had a vast command of the literature of the Three 
Teachings and could quote and use it profusively in literary allusions. He also was an 
renowned master of calligraphy, in the cursive, seal, and oflical lishu £]< U styles. His 
accomplishments in checkers, the lute, and in painting were also remarkable, and he 
was much admired for them. His writings were eagerly collected, and famous scholars 
vied with each other to befriend him. He never carried any money on him. When he 
was drunk, he would call on the thunder, and even in his sleep he dispatched petitions 
to Heaven. Unwashed and dressed in rags, he was truly eccentric. He was also able to 
foretell the future accurately. 

Liu says that aside from Bo’s alchemical secrets, he also obtained instructions con- 



1 



[ 930 ] 3 .A .7 Collectanea 



3 . A. 7 Collectanea [ 931 ] 



cerning the marshaling of thunder. These instructions are not found, however, in the 
present work. 

Tuan Bingling 

Haiqiong chua.nAa.oji jlj 

18 fols. 

Ascribed to Bo Yuchan Q 3 £ if@ , hao Haiqiong zi $ 5 fjt-p; after 1218 

1309 (fasc. 1017) 

“Collected Works on the Transmission of the Tao.” The texts in this work were col- 
lected and printed by two Taoists of Lushan Hill (Jiangxi): Chen Shoumo 
and Zhan Jirui jHHf ffj}. Chen and Zhan, who are also coauthors of the preface, write 
that Bo Yuchan had transmitted the texts to a Taoist of the Taiping xingguo gong 
temple, Hong Zhichang during a visit to Lushan in 1218. Hong Zhichang 

thereupon retired to practice the Tao, but Chen and Yan, fearing that Bo Yuchan’s 
teaching would be lost, collected the texts and published the work under the tide of 
Chuandaoji fUxiljl. Bo Yuchan’s stay in the Taiping xingguo gong in 121 8 is attested 
in 1286 Lushan Taiping xingguo gong Caifang zhenjun shishi 6.19b. According to the Siku 
quanshu zongmu 28.3077, however, Hong Zhichang was himself the compiler. 

The collection consists of three different works (preface, 2b), the first of which is the 
“Jindan jiejing ^ [jt ( 3 ? ” (Shortcut to the Elixir), which comprises esoteric diagrams 
explaining the neidan alchemical process. These diagrams are the same as those 
of 263 Xiuzhen sbishu i.2a-5b, but the order is different, and three diagrams are missing 
in our text. On the other hand, some pages of the present text are absent in the Xiu- 
zhen shishu version. The latter version divides the diagrams into two categories under 
the headings Bo xiansheng jindan huohou tu and Jindan juejing 

zhixuan fM f I H ; a discussion on these diagrams in the same work (dated 

1244), however, gives yet another tide: Hainan Bo xiansheng Xiuzhen yangming zhi tu 
{tUKMtniiZ. H (1.10a). The first work ends with a list of the patriarchs of the school, 
beginning with Zhongli Quan. 

The second work comprises the paragraph tided “Gousou lianhuan jing 
!M” (Scripture of the [Unending] Circle of the Hook and the Lock) and some poems. 
The hook and lock form part of a Buddhist expression that alludes to the all-pervading 
compassion of the Buddha. The tide “Gousuo lianhuan” seems to allude to a poem 
by Zhang Boduan quoted on nb. The text describes the underlying unity of all 
substances, using the Elixir as an example of a catalyst for a process that begins and 
ends in an unending cycle. Finally, the “Kuaihuo ge (Song of Joy) is a poem 

dedicated to Chen Zhibo 0 , a daoshi of the Taiping xingguo gong. This poem 
also figures in Bo Yuchan’s Shangqing ji (263 Xiuzhen shishu 39.7b). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



3.A.7.b Collected Works 

Taixuan langran zi jindao shi Jfc -f- iH if? 

7 fols. 

By Liu Xiyue zi Xiufeng ^ J# , hao Taixuan langran zi 988 

271 (fasc. 133) 

“Advancing in the Tao: Poems by Master Taixuan Langran.” According to the 
preface, Liu Xiyue wrote these thirty poems in the Tongxuan guan ill A'tR temple in 
Luoyang. A colophon (7a) adds that Liu was in charge of the temple, and that, in 988, 
the name of the latter was changed in his honor to Jizhen guan H jj| SS by Emperor 
Zhenzong, following Liu Xiyue’s transfiguration (see also 1100 Minghe yuy in 8.20a). 
This information, however, does not correspond to that found in Liu’s biographies in 
the Jixian zhuan by Zeng Zao (43.25b) and in LZTT 50.1b, according to which Liu 
became a Taoist in 988-989, at the age of sixty-four. 

The work was famous in the twelfth century. It was inscribed on stone during the 
Song in mi and again in 1150, under the Jin dynasty, when it was also printed (see 
Baqiong shi jinshi buzheng AJfllflifeSffilE I23.i8a-24a). The text in the Daozang 
and the Jin inscription show few differences, but the colophon by Wang Can 3 i is 
missing in the Daozang edition, which does not mention Wang. 

The Jindao shi was also known under different titles, such as Shenxian wudao shi ^ 
fill to tin# (according to the colophon) and Langran zi shi (according to 

the Song shi , “Yiwen zhi,” 4.5196). 

The preface and the thirty poems that comprise the work contain many allusions to 
qi techniques practiced in Inner Alchemy, as well as autobiographical information. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Tichuan jirangji fT ) 1 1 fR tfc 

20 juan 

By Shao Yong zi Yaofu hao Kangjie fStJffi (1012-1077) 

1042 (fasc. 720-723) 

“Collection of [Poems Made While] Beating the Ground, by [a Man from] Yi- 
chuan.” Yichuan (present Yiyang is the name of Shao Yong’s native place in 
Henan. Beating the ground was the way in which, according to tradition, the subjects 
of the great sage King Yao gave expression to their contentment. Shao Yong styled 
himself as “subject of Yao” (Yaofu ^ ^ ), and the reference in the title of his collection 
points to the fundamental optimism that pervades all his work. 

The collection comprises some 1,500 poems, which are, with the exception of those 
placed at the beginning, classified in a roughly chronological order. The author’s preface 
suggests that the compilation of this work had already begun in 1066. Nevertheless, 




[ 932 ] 3. A. 7 Collectanea 

the present book must have been completed and published by his son, Shao Bowen 
SIH6/S (1057-1134), because certains poems appearing in this collection are later than 
1066, some as late as the year of the author’s death (see 19.1b and also the funeral in- 
scription written by Cheng Hao fMH (1032-1085); cf. the postface of Xing Shu JfflJjS, 
dated 1091, in the Siku quanshu edition). 

The two other main editions of this work, in Sibu congkan H p|j M f [ J (1475) and 
Siku quanshu, contain elements that cannot be found in the Daozang edition: the post- 
face by Xing Shu mentioned above (the complement to the present collection of thir- 
teen additional poems tided Shiwaiji and several tens of poems addressed 

to Shao Yong by his friends, including Cheng Hao, Fu Bi 'gf Jjjj) (1004-1083), and 
Sima Guang (1019-1086). 

A large number of poems written by the author in response to poems offered by his 
friends reveal the close relations between Shao and prominent figures of his period. 

The last juan is taken up entirely by a series of 135 poems titled Shouweiyin 
(Chants of Head and Tail). These poems all begin and end with the same phrase: Yaofu 
feishi aiyinshi H ^ 1 # , which can be translated roughly as “Yaofu does not 

make poems merely for fun.” Indeed, in this long series the author addresses many 
serious subjects with deep insight and feeling, but without abandoning his optimism 
and sense of humor. 

The simplicity of style and colloquial expressions contribute to the charm of this 
collection. According to his preface, the author intended to make his poems exemplars 
of the classical lyric traditions of antiquity. His poetry praises the happiness of the 
simple and free life of a recluse, combining the moral virtues of Confucianism with 
Taoist aspirations of union with Nature. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Arrault, “Shao Yong”; Wyatt, The recluse ofLoyang. 

Kwong Hing Toon 

Sanshi dai tianshi Xujing zhenjun yulu + ft ^ fitft fjM itfi iR ip ill 

7 juan 

By Zhang Jixian (1092-1126); compiled by Zhang Yuchu jjg 

(1361-1410); preface dated 1395 

1249 (fasc. 996) 

“Recorded Sayings of the True Lord Empty Peace, the Thirtieth Heavenly Master.” 
This is a late compilation of the famous Heavenly Master Zhang Jixian, who lived 
under the reign of Song Huizong. Zhang Yuchu states in his preface that he collected 
all of Jixian’s works that he could find in the various monasteries he visited. However, 
some of these works might well be later fabrications. A few pieces are reliable and 



3. A. 7 Collectanea [ 933 ] 

known elsewhere, such as the “Xinshuo 'Left” (Discourse on the Mind; i.ia-2b) and 
the “Dadao ge (Song of the Great Tao; 3.ia-b) mentioned in his biographies 

(see LZTl 19.12). Both works are extant in the Yuan anthology us7 Qunxian yaoyu 
zuanji 2, and “Dadao ge” is also included in S79 Yangsheng bilu 18a. On the other 
hand, the poem given posthumously to the immortal Sa Shoujian IlyF!? (6.13b; his 
encounter with Zhang Jixian is often included in later hagiography) and other pieces 
related to the Qingcheng shan W li[ seem apocryphal. A large number of poems are 
linked to a certain Shi Yuangui JcM (or Zifang Q 7 ft ; see 1463 Han Tianshi shijia 
3.4b). Archives connected to this unknown Mr. Shi might be one of the sources of 
Zhang Yuchu’s work. 

Although termed Yulu (recorded sayings), the compilation includes only 

letters and short prose essays (juan 1) and poetry in various meters (juan 2 to 7). The 
poetry includes occasional verses, allusions to Zhengyi ritual, daoqing jUfjf poetry, 
mystical songs of a distinctive style (3.ia-3a), and more elaborate compositions on 
alchemy (see “Forty-eight Jindan Poems”; 5.8b— 18b). 

Vincent Goossaert 

Shangqing Taixuan ji _h fit 

10 juan 

By Hou Shanyuan hao Taixuan zi Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) 

1061 (fasc. 730-731) 

“Collected Works of the Shangqing (Master) Taixuan.” The author was from Gu- 
she shan li[ in Shanxi. Although a contemporary of the early Quanzhen Jfe Lp( 
masters, with whom he was acquainted (see 7sS Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing 
jing zhu ), Hou defines his doctrine as the Way of Shangqing ( Shangqing zhi dao _h 
/if 1. 6a) or the Great School of Shangqing (Shangqing dajiao _h/lf 1.17a). 
Yang Xi is alluded to on 6.4b, and the work does not contain a single reference to 
the Quanzhen school. Hou’s work, whether in prose or poetry, is distinctly didactic in 
nature. References to persons, places, or books are few and far between. From a poem 
(8.10b), we may guess that he visited the Jiangsheng guan on Hengshan j#j [_Lf 

(cf. 606 Nanyue zhongsheng ji 20a). In a sermon, he quotes a now lost commentary by 
Xu Shouxin alias Xu shenweng H (1033-1108) on a text by Lu Dongbin 

(4.12a). 

The first four juan are devoted to prose works, mostly sermons ( lun Ira ). The fifth 
chapter contains classical poems, a great number of which are written by disciples in 
reply to doctrinal questions. Usually only the surname of these disciples is given. One 
poem mentions the joint celebration by Buddhists and Taoists of a Retreat (zhai M ) 
service (5.25b). Later chapters contain ti-lyrics, sometimes using the vernacular. 

Kristofer Schipper 




[ <>34 ] 3. A. 7 Collectanea 

Yulong ji 5 . PI 3 l 

6 juan 

By Bo Yuchan S ; after 1225 

263.31 Xiuzhen shishu 31-36 (fasc. 127-128) 

“Collected Works Written in the Yulong Temple.” The Yulong gong on the 

Xishan [JLj in Jiangxi, a temple dedicated to Xu Xun, received the tide of Yulong 
guan during the period 1008-1060; in 1116, it was promoted to gong |=C (34.1b, 3a). 
This collection concerns events on the Xishan and its environment, mainly the Gezao 
shan 

According to an inscription (31.2b), Bo Yuchan had visited the Xishan three 
times since 1218. The latest date in the collection is 1220 (31.3b). In a note on 33.3a, 
however, Yunzhou Wj j‘H is rendered Ruizhou iffa j'H . The change was made officially 
in 1225 to avoid Lizong’s JS^ personal name. The date of the present collection is 
therefore later than 1225. 

The collection begins with inscriptions on various halls and temples. Only the first 
inscription was written in the Yulong gong; the remaining inscriptions concern mainly 
the Gezao shan. The next chapter comprises four poems, of which three are addressed 
to friends. The rest of the work consists of biographies of the Xishan saints. These are 
the earliest extant biographies of Xu Xun, his eleven disciples, and the teachers of the 
Xiaodao ^jjt school. 

All ofXu Xun’s subsequent biographies are based on the biography in the present 
text. Bo Yuchan provides these biographies with a wealth of critical notes. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Shangqing ji ± fit 

8 juan 

By Bo Yuchan £3 j£®8; ca. 1218 

263.13 Xiuzhen shishu 37-44 (fasc. 128-129) 

“Collected Works Written at the Shangqing Temple.” Although this collection of 
Bo Yuchan’s writings is named for the Shangqing gong temple on Longhu 

shan jfilJgUj, it is only in the first text, “Youxian yan ji HfflllllgE” (37.ia-2a), that 
we find the Shangqing gong mentioned specifically. The texts of this collection were 
either written or addressed to friends on Wuyi shan ill (Fujian), with two excep- 
tions: the third text, “Zhuyun tang ji HU'M’IE” (37-4a-7b), written on the occasion 
of Bo’s visit to the Zhuyun If jB hall on Qianshan IS fJL( , and the poem written on 
Lushan H | |JL| (39.7b); both mountains are in Jiangxi. 

Only four of the texts give any indication as to their dates (37.4a, 7a; 39.3a, 10b), 
the latest of which is 1216. The collection must therefore have been complied after that 



3 .A. 7 Collectanea [ 93s ] 

date. There is, moreover, evidence that the “Kuaihuo ge l&Tg®;” (39-4b) was written 
for the Taoist Chen Zhibo on Lushan in 1218 (see 1309 Haiqwng chuandaoji 12b 

and preface, ia). The Shangqing ji as a collection was well known in early Yuan times, 
as can be seen from the numerous quotations in 10 os Zhouyi cantong qifahui 5.5a and 
elsewhere. 

The collection includes notes or inscriptions ( ji gE) recording Bo’s visits to the 
retreats of friends in various temples (juan 37), and poems dedicated to friends and 
artists or to specific places— mountain peaks or halls and pavilions (juan 38). Juan 39 
comprises seven songs {ge ®i), some of which are rich in biographical details of Bos 
life (see especially “Yunyou ge and “Kuaihuo ge for the latter, see 

also 1309 Chuandao ji I2b-i6a). In “Bijing rendi ge Bo claims to have 

received instruction from Chen N iwan in 1205. Juan 40 is mostly composed of jueju 
fg-ctj verse in seven-character lines on the scenic beauty and the temples and retreats 
of the Wuyi shan; the rest of the chapter comprises poems dedicated to friends. Juan 
41 contains ct-lyrics. 

Juan 42 contains a/w-rhapsody on the name of a friend’s hermitage, a preface to a 
medical book, and three essays dealing mainly with the problems of sleep and the dif- 
ficulties involved in the practice of the Tao. Juan 43 contains inscriptions and eulogies, 
and juan 44 comprises several short memorials (ci § 5 ] , shuyu Mia)- 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Wuyi ji 

8 juan 

By Bo Yuchan 05 .®!; ca. 1216 

263.45 Xiuzhen shishu 45-52 (fasc. 129) 

“Collected Works Written on the Wuyi Shan.” Of the three collections of Bo’s works 
in 263 Xiuzhen shishu , the Wuyi ji contains the earliest material: none of the internal 
dates are later than 1216. The collection is also different from the other two in that it 
contains ritual material such as requests and memorials written by the author at the 
Chongyou guan (juan 47). The titles used by Bo in referring to himself are 

the same as those in 1220 Dew fa huiyuan 76.3a. 

The collection also contains allusions to other religious activities, such as praying 
for rain (46.6b-i2a, text with commentary). Three quarters of the collection, how- 
ever, is composed of poems in various styles, dedicated to friends or to temples. Juan 
46 includes eulogies on thirty-two Heavenly Masters, from Zhang Daoling r Mxll§l 
(second century a.d.) to Zhang Shouzhen (1136-1176). Autobiographical 

details are found in the inscription describing the rebuilding of the Zhizhi an ihih^ 
( 45 -ia- 5 a). 




[ 936 ] 3 . A . 7 Collectanea 



The importance of this collection lies in the wealth of its information on temples, 
monasteries, and persons. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Chunyang zhenren hunchengji M R§ B A ?1 H 

2 juan 

Compiled by He Zhiyuan fnji£$if, hao Qingzhen daoren r# ji A ; 1251 

1055 (fasc. 727) 

Collected Poems of Lii Dongbin.” The term hunch eng Wpj. in the title alludes to 
an expression by Han Yu ]£r % (768-824), human tian cheng Wffi, AhS (in entire ac- 
cord with heaven). This phrase was chosen to exemplify the qualities of the immortal 
Chunyang M(d§, that is, Lii Dongbin, whose poems constitute the present work. 
The compiler, He Zhiyuan, resided in a temple dedicated to Lii Dongbin, the Chun- 
yang gong (preface, 2a). He was one of the Taoists in charge of editing the 

Yuan Daozang (see VDL 52). 

There were several collections of Lii Dongbin’s poetry toward the end of the 
Song dynasty and the beginning of the Yuan. The Song shi , “Yiwen zhi,” 4.5197 men- 
tions a Chunyang ji in one juan. Another collection, the Jindan shijue 

** in m '° i uan was compiled by Xia Yuanding KliB around 1220. The latter 
includes not only Lii Dongbin’s poems but also his ci §I[ -lyrics, whereas our text is 
solely a collection of jueju and liishi poems in five- and seven-word verses. 

Most of the poems in juan 2 of the present work figure also in the Jindan shijue , and 
the last two poems in juan 1 are clearly compositions of Quanzhen ^ g origin (see 
1.1a). This is to be expected since the Chunyang gong was a Quanzhen temple and 
He Zhiyuan a daoshi of the Quanzhen school. Moreover, one of the poems in juan 2 
(number 41, missing in the Jindan shijue) even criticizes the methods described in 1191 
Bichuan Zhengyang zhenren linghao bifa- one of the most important texts attributed 
to Zhongli Quan and Lii Dongbin during the Song-as inferior (xiao xianfeng 
A fill h). Criticism of Northern Song Zhong-Lii M § texts was common among the 

Quanzhen adepts of the Yuan dynasty (see, e.g., 30s Chunyang dijun shenhua miaotong 
ji 2.9a). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Liizuzhi 
6 juan 

1484 (fasc. 1112-1113) 

“Monograph of the Patriarch Lii.” This book is a collection of hagiographical 
materials on Lti Dongbin. Certain miracles worked by the saint occurred in the 
second half of the sixteenth century (2.21b and 2.15a). This present monograph was 



3 . A . 7 Collectanea [ 937 ] 



^ ^ compiled shortly before the publica- 

n. C 9 tion of the supplement to the canon, 

ft ft % Q) Q Xu Daozang WlMiS.- The first dircc 

— " chapters are devoted to historical ac- 

^ ^ counts (“Shiji zhi (IMA”); the re- 

^ ^ maining three contain literary works 

^ V- \. attributed to the saint (“Yiwen zhi 

3 ' tjlMy y 41 A A”). At the beginning of the 

J £ MlSlfl 11 V book is a set of illustrations (“Tux- 

^ iangglfi”). (See fig. 39.) 

^' storca ^ P art * s com P osec i 
of a summary biography (“Zhenren 
^ ^ benzhuan RA^iU”; i.2b-na) 

and also an “autobiography” of the 
FIGURE 39. Lii Dongbin with his birth and saint (“Zhenren ziji R A S 15 ”; 

ascension dates (14&4 mb) i.i7b-i8a). The latter was originally 

engraved on the stele in Jiangzhou. 
From die second chapter on, short miracle tales and anecdotes (hua it ) are grouped 
by themes. They comprise eighty-six episodes, of which fifty-five are already found in 
30s Chunyang dijun shenhua miaotong ji. 

The “Yiwen zhi” contains 249 poems, all of them apocryphal, in various styles and 
prosodies. Some of diese poems are known from other sources: most of the regular 
poems are found in loss Chunyang zhenren hunch eng ji; one of the verses of Qinyuan 
chun |H H (6.2ia-b) is edited and provided with a commentary in 136 Lii Chunyang 
zhenren Qinyuan chun danci zhujie. More complete and edited better than the late 
collections Liidi shengji jiyao S'SrlljiifBl? (in Daozang jiyao) and Liizu quanshu 
(editions in sixty-four juan of 1775 and in thirty-three juan of 1868), the 
present book nevertheless has the characteristics of a popular compilation, especially 
compared with 30s Miaotong ji. 

Kwong Hing Foon 



figure 39. Lii Dongbin with his birth and 
ascension dates (1484 1.1b) 



Wuzhai xiansheng wenji tyj MJcitjCM 
2 juan 

Yang Zhizhi ,zi Xiuwcn A A, hao Wuzhai jj] (fl. 1228-1252) 

1148 (fasc. 788) 

“Literary Collection of Master Wuzhai.” Yang Zhizhi, a native of Fengcheng ( 

(Jiangxi), was first a Confucian and later became a daoshi. He retired on the mountain 
Gezao [H Q [ 1 | and there built the Monastery of Clouds and Springs (see the Tun- 
quan jingshe ji A A (AA IB of Liu Kezhuang §PJ Jt jj± , in Houcun xiansheng daquanji 




[ 938 ] 3 .A .7 Collectanea 



88.ia-2a). Wuzhai was both Yang’s hew and the name of his library. The word wu ty) 
comes from the Lunyu ms a 12, where Confucius teaches Yan Yuan Hi (UK a method 
to attain supreme virtue: “See nothing contrary to the rites, hear nothing contrary 
to the rites” (Jei li wu shi,fei li wu ting l^fii^Ili). Around the year 1228, 

Yang was a lecturer (jiangshi in the Gezao shan, but his hew suggests that he 

had not completely abandoned his earlier education (cf. the “Wuzhai ji of 

Zhen Dexiu 01111 , 1178-1235). In the years Zhunyou (1241-1252), he was honored, 
by imperial decree, with the tide of gaoshi illj i (eminent master) and appointed a 
Taoist official in the capital and superintendent of religious affairs (youjie jianyi zhu- 
gutmjicwmen gongshi tS (li ^ 4. llr PI ; 1.1a; i.i8b-i9b; see also Songshi jishi 
90.2149). 

Yang was responsible for the affairs of the Taiyi Palace (i.ia-2a; i.i9b-2ob; 

cf. the remarks of Zhao Xibian on the Zhugong biaozhi rff ( J ) and of 

the Jingde guan IM'iMW. temple of the capital (i.4a-sa). 

The present book also appears in Siku quemshu |Z3 I? ^ U (“Bieji lei FHHHfl”), and 
its author is considered a stylist worthy to succeed the famous Li Shangyin 4 j§j |jjt 
(813-858). In fact, the whole book, composed of sixty-eight articles with two identical 
entries (the last of each chapter), is written in a style of parallel prose ( pianwen 
using phrases of four or six characters. The collection consists mostly of occasional 
writings thanking officials for their kindness (i.7b-9b), for an appointment (2.8b-9b), 
congratulating them on a promotion (i.3a-4a), wishing them many happy returns 
(2.6b-8b), making apologies (i.2a-3b), and so on. 

Kwong Hing Foon 

Xuanzong zhizhi wanfet tonggui 2C tk iff f f^I M 

7 juan 

By Mu Changzhao |; compiled by Huang Benren J I after 1294 

1066 (fasc. 734-735) 

“Reintegration of the Thousand Dharma, Being a Straightforward Explanation 
of the Taoist Tradition.” This text contains the collected works of Mu Changzhao, 
a Taoist of the Southern (Nanzong pjq^c) tradition. Little is known about Mu: he 
says himself that he entered Buddhism and studied Chan as a youth and that later he 
turned to Inner Alchemy, when he encountered an otherworldly man who instructed 
him (3.7a). He refers to war (6.i7a-b) and foreign monks (3.26b), seemingly alluding 
to the painful experience of the Mongol conquest of southern China. The only date 
mentioned is 1294 (6.20a). The author must therefore have lived under the Southern 
Song and the Yuan. Nothing is known about his disciple Huang Benren. According to 
the subtitles. Mu hailed from the Yangshan daoyuan ffll [_L| (tc in Jian’an [xian] 

H (northern Fujian), which is not documented either in gazetteers or other sources. 



3 A. 7 Collectanea [ 939 ] 



® yL 1^ 4k =• 




X, s A- '6' Tt-3- 

$ % vs/ 

% t* %■ 

figure 40. Diagram illustrating 
the fundamental unity of the 
Three Teachings ( 1066 1.7a). 

Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy 
of the Bibliotheque nationale de 
France. (Chinois 9546/1052) 




figure 41. The buffalo and its Precious Chariot: An 
allegorical representation of the relationship between 
body and soul ( 1066 i.ioa-b). Ming reprint of 1598. 
Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. 
(Chinois 9546/1052) 



Mu does not quote many authors but refers repeatedly to the Wuzhen plan to R H ; 
he also mentions Bo Yuchan and several major works of the Nanzong (3.1b, 21b). It 
can therefore be assumed that he belonged to that tradition, yet he discusses favorably 
the Quanzhen ife 01 school (3.7b) and the Way of Loyalty and Filial Piety ( zhongxiao 
dao f£#il) of Xishan (3_i6a-b, 20b). His own approach is to equate the Three Teach- 
ings (and especially Buddhism and Taoism) in the cultivation otxing 14 and ming pp 
and in their union with the Great Ultimate ;fc|S. His main endeavor is to systemati- 
cally compare the concepts of Buddhist and Taoist theology and cosmology. 

Although containing little historical information, this work is a rare and valuable 
example of a complete corpus of writings by a single neidan LF master. It includes 
theoretical essays (i.ia-2.i8b), dialogues (2.i8b-4.i6b), and poems (4.i6b-7.na) that 
vary greatly with respect to their tone and vocabulary. The thirty-four essays, some 
of them accompanied by charts, are mostly about cosmology and do not dwell on 
alchemical processes (figs. 40—41). The dialogues are divided between alchemical 
questions (“Huowen jindan xingming lei fn] 4: LF 14 on II in all 109 exchanges, 



[ 940 ] 3 . A . 7 Collectanea 

2.i8b-3.28b) and those of a more cosmological and philosophical order (“Huowen 
taiji lei fifty-three exchanges, 4.ia-i6b). The dialogues do not exhibit 

the extemporaneous creativity of the livelier Recorded Sayings ( yulu IK ) of that 

period, but they, too, focus on practical questions and demonstrate the master’s peda- 
gogy. The poems are mostly in regulated verse (shi |rp) with a few lyrics (ci go]); they 
include both sets of systematic neidan dialectics and occasional pieces dedicated to 
friends or commemorating an event. Together, these pieces document the wide array 
of styles and media available to a neidan teacher of that time. 

The work closes with two ethical poems (7.7a-na), commentated by a certain Lin 
Daozhao possibly a fellow disciple of Mu. These poems refer explicitly to the 

Zhongxiao school. 

Vincent Goossaert 

Daofa xinchuan M 'd' fi? 

33 fols. 

By Wang Weiyi hao Jingyang zi (d. 1326) 

1253 (fasc. 997) 

“Spiritual Tradition of Taoist Rites.” This is a collection of didactic poetry and 
discourses explaining cosmology in terms of mental representations. The title of the 
present book does not correspond to that of any work known to have been written 
by Wang, as listed in his biography in the Wuzhong renwu zhi 11.12a. Indeed, the the 
work appears to be a refacimento composed of fragments of two different books, the 
Xinglei xinchuan ffULLfH and the Daofa jingwei jjf if . 

The first part (ia-i6b), devoted to poetry, has a preface dated 1294 and signed “the 
disciple from Songjiang ffiiT [Jiangsu], petty officer of the Thunder [Board] [Leiting 
sanli If Hf!f|£], Jingyang [zi], Wang Weiyi,” in which the book is named xinchuan 
L'fH (preface 2b). 

The second part (i7a-33a) is identified on 20b as the Daofa jingwei. It has a separate 
preface (i9a-i9a), also dated 1294, that must be spurious. Indeed, this second part 
quotes (22b) another work by Wang, namely, 273 Mingdao pian 9a (dated 1304). The 
Daofa jingwei must, therefore, be later than this work, a fact that can also be deduced 
from a remark by the author on 20b, stating that he is “already advanced in age” (^ 
This second part must also be later than the first part, since on 30b the text 
quotes “my Xinchuan lu and this quote corresponds to a poem in the first 

part of the present work (10b). Other similar quotations on 26b and 29b can no longer 
be found in the first part, which therefore must be incomplete. 

The Daofa jingwei is entirely devoted to spiritual glosses of the Thunder rites 
(leifa W'f ) in the tradition of Bo Yuchan and Mo Yueding H ^ Jfff (1226-1294). 
A quotation of a text by the latter on i9b-2oa can be traced to Mo’s “Tuoyue shuji 



3 .A .7 Collectanea [ 941 ] 

shuo in 1220 Daofa huiyuan 77.8a-9b. Among the many other masters 

quoted, we may note the presence of the Qingwei patriarch Huang Leiyuan §f 'H 
(fl. 1253-1287). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Tuanyang zifayu Bu 

2 juan 

By Zhao Yizhen Jia* (d. 1382); edited by Liu Yuanran (1351- 

1432) 

1071 (fasc. 738) 

“Religious Discourses by Master Original Yang.” These are the collected works of 
Zhao Yizhen, who was active in the beginning of the Ming dynasty and one of the 
patriarchs of the Qingwei school. He is also known as the teacher of the prominent 
court Taoist Liu Yuanran, who edited the present work. Zhao’s main biography is 
by Zhang Yuchu (1361-1410), the Forty-third Heavenly Master, and can be found in 
the latter’s 1311 Xianquan ji 4.iia-i2b (a more complete version is in the Siku quanshu 
[Zgjiijf j£|jf edition, 3.38a-4ob). Zhao was canonized as Chongwen guangdao chunde 
yuanyang zhenren in 1455 • 

The collection contains mosdy literary works, some of which are of an autobio- 
graphical nature, such as the poem “Jtxue (1.11a), in which Zhao recalls his own 

apprenticeship under Master Jin Pengtou jfxiM (1276-1336). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Schipper, “Master Chao I-chen.” 

Kristofer Schipper 

Xianquan ji ffll ^ ^ 

12 juan 

By Zhang Yuchu ^k‘grfJ],hao Qishan wuwei tianshi H 1407 

1311 (fasc. 1018-1021) 

“Collected Works from Xianquan.” This literary collection is named after the Xian- 
quan retreat of the Forty-third Heavenly Master, Zhang Yuchu (1361-1410), which 
was established on Mount Longhu in 1391. The collection bears witness to the remark- 
able scope of the Heavenly Master’s literary activities. There are three prefaces, one of 
which is by Zhang Yuchu himself. The third preface, by Cheng Tong is dated 
1407. The Siku quanshu zhenben HSlMXfsXX contains an edition of this work in 
four juan. Both this edition and the present one derive from earlier versions that are no 
longer extant. However, these lost versions were most likely already incomplete. The 
editors of the text in the Siku quanshu apparently did not make use of the version in the 




[ 942 ] 3 .A .8 Handbooks and Anthologies 






3.A.8 Handbooks and Anthologies [943 ] 



Daozang , which contains, among other things, poems not found in the Siku quanshu 
edition. On the other hand, the Daozang edition does not contain the tomb epitaphs 
included in the Siku quanshu edition. The arrangement of the material in twelve juan 
is probably due to the editors of the Ming Dcwzang , whereas the Siku quanshu edition 
still preserves the original arrangement in four juan. 

This collection contains essays about philosophical and historical themes. There are 
many poems and dedications that show that Zhang Yuchu was rightly admired for 
his literary erudition. His preface on the lineage of the Heavenly Masters (2.6a-8a) 
served as a postface for 1463 Han tianshi shijia 4.i7b-i9b. His “postface” for the dis- 
courses of the thirtieth Zhengyi patriarch (2.na-i2b) is a preface in 1249 Sanshi dai 
tianshi Xujing zhenjun yulu. The texts compiled in this collection were written before 
the revision of the Taoist canon started in 1406 (cf. 1232 Daomen shigui). Sun Kekuan 
compares the contents of the two extant editions in “Mingchu tianshi,” 315-20. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Sun Kekuan, “Mingchu tianshi Zhang Yuchu ji qi XianquanjiV 

Florian C. Reiter 



3. A. 8 Handbooks and Anthologies 

Most of the texts included in this section are well known outside the Dcwzang. 
The great imperial encyclopedia, the Taiping yulan is present here in an 

abstracted form, listing only the entries related to Taoism. The famous 1032 Tunji qi- 
qian, although a private compilation, has been widely read in all literary circles. The 
collection of texts 263 Xiuzhen shishu reflects the great popularity and influence of the 
so-called Southern school of Inner Alchemy Taoism, as represented by Bo Yuchan 
and his disciples. 

Remarkably, none of these anthologies, with the notable exception of 1483 Tian- 
huang zhidao taiqing yuce, deal with liturgical practice, which is all the more significant 
since in the first great Taoist encyclopedia, 1138 Wushang biycw , and even more so in 
the Tang collectanea, liturgy occupied a central place. Song and later works, except 
1483 Taiqing yuce, deal almost exclusively with Tending Life techniques, which does not 
mean, as part 3.B shows, that liturgical Taoism suffered a decline. A shift in emphasis 
is, however, undeniable and announces the advent of new forms of Taoist practice, 
such as those propagated by the Quanzhen ^ school, where self-cultivation be- 
comes the central issue, and liturgy, although not absent, plays a lesser role in the life 
of the daoshi. 



Taiping yulan 

3 juan 

Compiled by Li Fang et al.; 983 

1230 (fasc. 988) 

This text corresponds to juan 674-676 of the imperial encyclopedia TPYL, com- 
prising die section on holy sites ( lisuo IMP/f ), vestments ( guan nj. , etc.), and insignia 
( jianzhang f®$)- 

Kristofer Schipper 

Tunji qiqian ft L M 

122 juan 

Compiled by Zhang Junfang jJSitJPi (A- 1008-1025) 

1032 (fasc. 677-702) 

“Cloudy Bookcase with Seven Labels.” This work is one of the major Taoist 
anthologies, and also a major source for otherwise lost works, especially from the 
Tang dynasty (618-907). This vast compilation was praised by the authors of the Siku 
quanshu zongmu tiyao (146.12a) as “an anthology of the [Dcwzang] that, with its clear 
classification, its concise yet complete examples, its rational organization in which 
nothing is omitted, remains valid until the present day.” The intention of the author, 
as expressed in the undated preface to the anthology, seems indeed to have been to 
compile a compendium from the Taoist canon that he himself had, or claimed to have, 
edited. Zhang Junfang became a jinshi j|| jr during the period 1004-1008 and 
served as an official in different capacities in the capital, his hometown. Author of a 
few collections of “remarkable stories” one of which survives in its original form, he 
became editor of the Dcwzang in 1013, thanks to the patronage of Wang Qinruo. 
This edition of the Daozang was the Da Song tiangong baozang com- 

piled under imperial auspices during the reigns of emperors Taizong (976-9 97 ) and 
Zhenzong (997-1022). It comprised 4,565 juan and was presented to the throne in 
1019. Zhang correctly stresses the fact that the system of classification adopted for 
this edition of the Dcwzang followed the Tang usage of grouping the texts into seven 
categories ( qibu -fcofl): the Three Caverns (sandong H P ) and the Four Auxiliaries 
( sifu [AJld ). The expression qiqian CfiSc (seven [book] labels) in the title refers to this 
division into seven parts. 

The anthology in its present form, however, does not show such an arrangement. It 
is not divided into seven parts and the organization of the subject matter is, despite the 
praise of the authors of the Siku tiyao , rather confused. There appears to be a division 
into sections (bu), but these are not always clearly indicated. John Lagerwey, in his 
study of the sources of the Tunji qiqian (in Schipper, Index du Tunji qiqian, xix— lxxi) 
has identified thirty-seven sections. The first section is devoted to the philosophical 



( 




[ 944 ] 3.A.8 Handbooks and Anthologies 

definitions of Tao and de. Then follow a number of sections on cosmology and the 
revelation of sacred scriptures. Sections 7 to n deal with Heaven and Earth, the stars, 
and holy places. Sections 12 to 26, covering juan 29 to 86 (that is, almost half of the 
entire anthology), deal with Tending Life {yangsheng Hjfe) techniques, including 
alchemy. Sections 27 to 32 contain doctrinal and philosophical treatises; sections 33 to 
35 contains poetry. The last two sections concern hagiography. 

These topics do not, however, exhaust all the aspects of Taoism represented in the 
canon. Most remarkable is die total absence of liturgy. The Tunji qiqian does not con- 
tain any ritual for Retreats (zhai ^ ) or Offerings (jiao Si ). It has no petitions {zhang 
Jjl) or memorials (shu ®it), nor any other kind of ritual documents. It contains only 
a handful of talismans, charts, and diagrams. We can be certain, however, that works 
concerning ritual occupied a large place in the canon that Zhang J unfang edited. 
The inevitable conclusion must, therefore, be that die Tunji qiqian as we have it cannot 
be considered a representative anthology of the Song canon. 

It seems likely that the present version of the Tunji qiqian has not descended from 
the original work, but that the text has undergone changes. The original Tunji qiqian 
had 120 juan, whereas the present version has 122. Moreover, several juan are divided 
into two parts— A {shang _h) and B (xia j' )— for no apparent reason, which further 
increases the total count of juan. Apart from the present version in the Ming Canon, 
there is a later Ming edition by Zhang Xuan (1558-1641), reprinted in the Siku 
quanshu 015^11. Despite a number of textual variants and some differences in the 
arrangement into juan, this edidon is on the whole identical to the present text. The 
Tunji qiqian was already included in the Xuandu baozang £ f|5 ff compiled by 
the Quanzhen masters in 1244. A single fascicle of this edition survives in the Palace 
Museum in Taipei. Here also, the text contained in this fascicle is the same as the 
corresponding part of the version in die Ming canon. 

At present, it is impossible to explain the considerable discrepancies between 
Zhang Junfang’s preface to the Tunji qiqian and the actual anthology. In addition 
to the above-mentioned structural inconsistencies, there are other problems, such as 
the fact that Zhang states that Manichaean texts were included in the compilation of 
the Song canon. This reference has attracted the interest of historians of Manichaeism, 
but the Tunji qiqian does not contain any identifiable Manichaean material. Then there 
is the overall account Zhang gives regarding his involvement with the compilation 
of the Da Song tiangong baozang. Van der Loon has concluded that this account is 
untrustworthy (VDL 31-34). Zhang had nothing to do with the arrangement of the 
canon, which was stricdy supervised by the government. It may well be, then, that the 
ordering of materials which Zhang adopted for his anthology, while not correspond- 
ing to that in the actual canon, translated his own views about how the work should 
have been organized. 



3 .A. 8 Handbooks and Anthologies [ 945 ] 

The Dongxiao tuzhi , a monograph of the Taoist temples on Dadi shan 
(Jiangsu, near Hangzhou), reports that one of the copies of the new Daozang made 
under the auspices of Emperor Zhenzong (the Tiangong baozang) was bestowed on 
this center. From that copy, after revision by an eminent Taoist scholar named Feng 
Dezhi new copies were made under the title of Tunji qiqian. Significantly, the 

title “Cloudy Bookcase with Seven Labels,” here referring explicitly to the sevenfold 
division of the canon, was a fitting name for a Daozang , whereas Zhang’s handbook 
did not follow that arrangement. If the Dongxiao tuzhi account is accurate, and there 
are no reasons to suppose it is not, then, after the copies of the imperial Daozang be- 
came available in Hangzhou and were distributed under the title Tunji qiqian , Zhang 
Junfang, or possibly someone else borrowing his name, may have compiled the 
present anthology using the same title. 

Whatever the case, there is no reason to suppose that the actual Tunji qiqian is 
not a work of the beginning of the Song period. The encyclopedia does not contain 
texts later than Zhenzong’s reign. The source material comes almost exclusively from 
Six Dynasties (220-589) and Tang works. Many texts are quoted in extenso, whereas 
others are abridged or, in some cases, reworked into new compositions. A few Five 
Dynasties (907-960) texts are included. From the Song, we find a few prefaces by the 
emperor Zhenzong. There is also a complete account of the manifestations of the di- 
vine protector of the Song dynasty, Yisheng baode zhenjun ffl 1? H tl M § , by Wang 
Qinruo. Zhang Junfang evokes Wang’s memory in the preface, saying: The 
late . . . Wang Qinruo considered that your servant was capable of accomplishing 
this task.” The Tunji qiqian must, therefore, have been presented to the throne after 
Wang’s death in 1025. The emperor to whom the work was presented was therefore 
Renzong (r. 1023-1064). Renzong was a lesser patron of Taoism than Zhenzong had 
been, and it may be that Zhang took this fact into account. While presenting his work 
as the emperor’s “bedside companion,” he presumably left out all that was neither 
timely nor of interest to the ruler, which may explain why the Tunji qiqian has the 
specific character of a handbook on mystical and Tending Life Techniques, and not 
that of a Taoist encyclopedia. 

bibliography 

Jiang Lisheng, Tunji qiqian; Schipper, Index du Tunji Qiqian ; Yang Fucheng, ‘ Tunji qiqian 
de juanshu bianxi.” 

Kristofer Schipper 




[ 949 } 3. A.8 Handbooks and Anthologies 

Xiuzhen shishu flf ig ± -J* 

60 juan 

Compiled ca. 1340 

263 (fasc. 122-131) 

“Ten Books on the Cultivation of the True Nature.” This is a collection of texts com- 
piled by adherents of the Bo Yuchan school. Although the latest date in the work 
is 1244 (1.10a), the collection itself was completed only during the Yuan (1279-1368): 
the Zazhujtejmg (juan 17-25; see below) was probably compiled by the Yuan author 
Yu Juehua during the Zhiyuan period (1335-1340). 

Collections with the term xiuzhen in their tides were common during the 
Yuan dynasty: Yu Yan, for instance, mentions a Xiuzhen sishu of 1270 (cf. 

Xishang futan 2.12a). 

The Xiuzhen shishu contains excellent editions of Taoist texts and, in some cases, of 
works that are not available as separate entities in the Daozang. In view of this fact, its 
contents, listed below, are discussed individually in the relevant sections: 

1. Zazhu zhixuan pian (treatises of Bo Yuchan etal.) 

2 .Jindan dachengji Ah£H (collected works of Xiao Tingzhi fl. 

1260) 

3. Zhong-Lu chuandao ji |fi S {Hilt M (unique edition in Daozang) 

4. Zazhu jiejing ft ® (Yuan, unique edition) 

5. Wuzhenpian f§lB£§ (oldest edition of this text; unique in the Daozang ) 

6. Tulongji (collected works of Bo Yuchan unique edition) 

7. Shangqingji ±(#11 

8. Wuyiji 

9. Panshan yulu §§ 1 1 ) §§ (cf. 10S9 Panshan Qiyun Wang zhenren yulu) 

10. Huangting neijing wuzang liufu tu JtMftfEU AMP (cf. 432 Huangtmg 
neijing wuzang liufu buxie tu) 

11. Huangting neijing yujing zte ^ M ft M A* $ 7± (commentary by Liangqiu zi 
A'frA; cf. 402 Huangting neijing yujing zhu) 

12. Huangting waijing yujing zhu if Jf A$lf£ (commentary by Liangqiu zi; 
unique edition) 

Texts 10-12, all of which deal with the Huangting jing, together form the last of the 
ten books. Possibly, texts 11-12 constitute later additions. 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



I 



3.A.8 Handbooks and Anthologies [947] 



Qunxian yaoyu zuanji fill H lo H H 
2 juan 

Compiled by Dong Jinchun it SHIP, hao Huanchu daoren j§ xM A ; late Yuan 
(1279-1368) or early Ming (1368-1644) 

1257 (fasc. 998-999) 

“Fundamental Sayings by the Host of Immortals.” This is a collection of texts from 
different times and schools on the practice of the Tao and spiritual attainment, by an 
otherwise unknown author. There are passages (i.ib-nb) taken from the Guanyin 
zi ( 667 Wushang miaodao wenshi zhenjing), a work that regains importance 

under the Yuan, as well as texts by Wang Zhe, Ma Danyang (1123-1183), and Bo 
Yuchan. The author quotes (2.7a-8a) Wang Jie’s 1074 Huanzhen ji. The present 
work should therefore be of the late Yuan or early Ming period. 

One of the interesting texts preserved in this collection is the Song of the Great Way 
(“Dadao ge AiM l±”’) by Cao Wenyi According to a Luofu shan zhi Wt ±| 

A, quoted in Gujin tushu jicheng, “Shenyi dian Cao wrote this song during 

the Xuanhe era (1119-1125). Cao Wenyi, alias Cao Daochong 0 (M ( 4 1 , was canonized 
by Emperor Huizong as Wenyi zhenren A £8 A • She also wrote a commentary to 
the Daodejing (see 707Daode zhenjing jizhu, preface). The “Dadao ge” is quoted in an 
abridged form in 1017 Daoshu i6.ia-3a. There it is attributed to the female immortal 
He Xiangu fnf f[I| ## . It is reproduced in the Daozang jiyao, “Kui ±,” under the title 
Song of the Supreme Truth (“Zhizhen ge ± f)v”), in this case it is attributed to Liu 
Haichan. 

Other works cited are 1044 Huashu (i.ii-i6a), 1032 Zongxuan xiansheng xuangang 
lun (i.i6a-24), 1249 Sanshi dai tianshi Xujing zhenjun yulu i.ia-2 (2.ia-2b), 1233 Chun- 
yang lijiao shiwu lun 3b-4a and 5a (2.3a-3b), and 1308 Haiqiong wendao ji 4b-ioa 
(2.9b-i5a). In 2.i5a-i6a, the present collection quotes the sayings of Ma Danyang, 
but these cannot be found in 1234 Danyang zhenren zhiyan. 

Catherine Despeux 

Tianhuang zhidao taiqing yuce ft ± A ill A iff A ffff 
8 juan 

By Zhu Quan A fH , hao Quxian (jjlfLlj, Xialing laoren ± ± A , alias Nanji 
chongxu miaodao zhenjun R © (1378-1448); preface dated 1444 

1483 (fasc. 1109-1111) 

“Most Pure and Precious Books on the Supreme Tao of August Heaven.” This is 
an encyclopedic work on the Taoist faith and liturgy, written by Prince Zhu Quan, 
the seventeenth son of Ming Taizu (r. 1368-1398). In this work the author identifies 
himself only by his pseudonymn, Quxian (Lean Immortal). After his brother Zhu Di 
Af£ had won the throne and established his capital at Peking under the reign name of 



[ 94-8 ] 3.A.8 Handbooks and Anthologies 

Yongle (r. 1403-1424), Zhu Quan moved to the south of China, at Nanchang (Jiang- 
xi). Although Zhu Quan is known for his work as a dramaturge, his literary oeuvre 
bears constant testimony to his Taoist convictions, which are fully expressed in the 
present work. 

In his preface and introductory essay (“Yuandao JJKJlt”), the author explains his 
own destiny as a divine being, which was revealed to him at an early age by an old 
woman, who told him never to forget his previous lives. After having been a minister 
of Shaohao, and again under Wilding of the Shang, he rose up to Heaven to be ap- 
pointed as Nanji chongxu miaodao zhenjun ■ After 2,699 years 

he again reincarnated on Earth. The old lady recommended that he not reveal his true 
identity before the age of sixty. Thus the present work dates to the year he was sixty- 
four. 

The work deals in an encyclopedic way with Taoist cosmology and revelation. It 
presents the Taoist canon in all its aspects, as well as the main oudines of the initiatory 
rules and institutions linked to it. The Zhengyi IE— as well as the Quanzhen i^lJt 
institutions are fully documented, as are the main aspects of the liturgy. Topics such 
as Taoist music, ritual vestments, and religious regulations are all duly recorded. 

Remarkable for its absence is any in-depth discussion or documentation of Tend- 
ing Life techniques, including Inner Alchemy and laboratory alchemy. Immortality 
practices are introduced only briefly in 6.i3a-i8a. This fact contradicts the tradition 
that the Lean Immortal was above all interested in longevity practices. 

Among the many ideas, personal and general, expressed in the work, the claim that 
Taoism is the true faith of China and that the Chinese should all practice it figures 
prominently. The anti-Taoist measures by the Mongols, especially the burning of the 
Daozang by Kublai, are vehemently denounced as assaults on Chinese culture (2.3a 
and 5b-6b). A list of pernicious (Buddhist) works slandering Taoism is given. On the 
whole, China and its culture are glorified, and foreigners criticized. Among the latter, 
only the Koreans have the honor to possess the Taoist tradition, which they obtained 
from several great Chinese emperors (6.25a-27a). The Daozang edition contains a 
misprint between 6.i3b2 and I4b6, where a discussion of the Way of the immortals is 
interrupted by a fragment of encyclopedic entries. 

Kristofer Scbipper and Tuan Bingling 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [949] 



3.B Texts in Internal Circulation 



See the general introduction to part 3 for an overview of the development of liturgi- 
cal Taoism in the early modern era. 



3.B.1 Zhengyi 

As shown in the introduction to part 3 above, the medieval ecclesia of the Heavenly 
Master was gready transformed during die late Tang (618-907) and the following 
centuries. Perhaps the most visible and immediate sign of this transformation is the 
way the First Heavenly Master, Zhang Daoling 55 xM W . , came to be considered during 
this period. In the middle ages, Zhang Daoling was seen as a recluse, as an alchemist, 
and as the founder of the Heavenly Master ecclesia. Now he came to be represented 
as a powerful exorcist, as a popular saint commanding the powers of the thunder, and 
as the patriarch of exorcists, to whom he revealed secrets of Thunder magic that had 
never been disclosed before. As the following articles will show, the founders of the 
Tianxin zhengfa in the Five Dynasties period (907-960) were said to have 

received such revelations, and the same claim was made by the Yutang fa Ti bi '/£ in 
the early Southern Song (1127-1279) period. 

During the Song dynasty, the Heavenly Masters of the Longhu shan til be- 
came one of the great and officially recognized religious institutions of modern China 
(see the general introduction and the introduction to part 3 above). The exorcist lin- 
eages of Tan Zixiao (Tianxin zhengfa) and Lu Shizhong (Yutang fa) emerged 
without any direct relationship to the Longhu shan establishment. Toward the end of 
the Northern Song (960-1127), the link between the Heavenly Masters and the Tian- 
xin zhengfa was established, according to legendary accounts, through the Thirtieth 
Heavenly Master, Zhang Jixian 55 M 9 t (1092-1126; sces 66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa 

±rf^L'lEr£). 

Despite this assimilation, it should be remembered that the Zhengyi tradition, even 
in its new form as institutionalized in the Longhu shan patriarchy, was heir to die 
ancient liturgical organization of the Tang and therefore dispensed the official ordina- 
tion grades that empowered officiants to perform the classical rites of the Heavenly 



[9S0] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [ 9 SI ] 



Master and Lingbao canons. These ties to tradition did not hold for the new exorcist 
lineages. The latter developed their own initiation grades and titles, as in the case 
of the Tianxin zhengfa and Shenxiao fa yfe. However, instead of replacing the 
classical system, these grades and tides were simply added to it, with the result that 
officiants could now hold qualifications from both lineages. In fact, the specialists of 
the new exorcistic rites, called fashi or faguan ^feUf, always remained at a lower 

religious and social level than the daoshi who had received the traditional ordination. 
It is therefore inappropriate, in spite of the manifold interactions between the regular 
liturgy (ke f\) and the rites (fa (f ), to discuss them together. Thus we will first present 
the materials related to the traditional Zhengyi, Sanhuang, Lingbao, and Shangqing 
scriptures, and then discuss the new exorcistic lineages and their texts separately. 

The Zhengyi order itself created classical liturgical texts in the form of rituals 
and scriptures that were to be performed to avert disasters such as epidemics, fires, 
drought, and so on. These rituals took the form of Offerings ( jiao Si). Earlier, jiao 
were mosdy performed at the conclusion of a long Retreat (zhai 0 ) service for the 
benefit of the deceased, whereas now they became the main element of the ritual. It 
is this evolution that, in time, would bring about the separation between a liturgy for 
the benefit of the living, dominated by the Offering and called jiao, and one for the 
dead, in which the merit (gongde 5 -j] ) of the Retreat would be the most important 

element, and which, accordingly, was commonly referred to as zhai. Also contributing 
to this evolution was the appearance of the Great Offering to the Entire Firmament 
0 luotian dajiao This service, although preceded by the classical huanglu 

zhai IfHHf, was essentially a large-scale offering to all the stars and constellations 
in the Chinese heavens (see the complete list of the stellar deities and the offerings 
presented to them in 1224 Daomen dingzhi 3). 

The worship of stars, and especially of the stars of Fate in Ursa Major (Beidou it 
if), became a specialty of the new Zhengyi school, and scriptures as well as rituals 
related to the practice of venerating the Dipper (baidou -if ) are numerous in this 
section. Among these scriptures, the Taishang xuanling beidou yansheng zhenjing is the 
most famous; revealed by the Most High Lord Lao to Zhang Daoling, it became one 
of the most popular religious scriptures of China during the Ming (1368-1644) and 
Qing (1644-1911) periods. 



3.B.l.a Scriptures 

Shangqing zhenyuan rongling jing h fS 7 C ^ M 

17 fols. 

Northern Song (960-1127)? 

860 (fasc. 577) 

“Scripture of Stabilizing the Creative Forces and Making the Numinous Powers 
Shine Brighdy, of the Shangqing Tradition.” The book is listed in the Bishu shengxu- 
biandao siku queshu mu (VDL 76) and seems most likely to be of a Northern Song 
date. The method of the book is said to have been revealed to a duke of immortals 
(xiangong {[il^i) and practiced by him at Tianmu shan fJLl , reputed to be the 
birthplace of Zhang Daoling 3 H£I§£ (ia). The affiliation of the text with the Zhengyi 
order is further indicated by the tide of the practitioner. Da xuandu zhengyi dizi 
(7a). 

The T. 7 . TT 41.17a to 42.4a gives the biographies of four daoshi of the Tang dynasty 
(618-907), beginning with Zhai Fayan H fife U , zi Qianyou who in 755 received, 
by supernatural means, the transmission of a Taishang zhengyi mengwei bifa ;fc_hIE 
— HKlcf&fife. He also transmitted to his disciples a Zhenyuan celing shu M 7 C M M H , 
which, according to the description given on 42.3a-b, accords with the present work. 
The last disciple to receive the text was Ren Keju hf © (A- 890-892), and after him, 
the biography says, the transmission was interrupted. Although the present version 
has rong $f§ instead of ce fjt in the tide, and although here the details of the account of 
the revelation (ia) are different, the similarities are too close to be ignored. Zhai was 
also the recipient of 389 Taishang dongxuan lingbao suling zhenfu (q.v.). 

The book describes a method of summoning the spirits of the stars of the Dipper by 
means of fu and offerings. The method is presented as serving primarily the purpose 
of divinatory questioning, and secondarily that of obtaining various kinds of blessings 
through the help of the spirits. It includes the construction of an altar on which the 
fu of the seven stars are placed in the form of the constellation and in accordance with 
its immediate position in the sky, with the fu of Ziwei dijun in the center 

(6b-7a). Similar methods are found in the texts of the Dongshen tradition, in which, 
however, the spirits summoned are those of the Eight Trigrams (compare .389 Taishang 
chiwen dongshen sanlu and 1202 Dongshen badi yuanbian jing). Indeed, the groups of 
fu concluding the present book, and subsumed as “Taishang sanjia yuce jvilH 

(9a-i7b), are closely related to those that are central to the method described in 
the third part of/89 Dongshen sanlu. Note, for instance, the correspondence between 
the appearance and text of the “Tiance fu of the present book (ioa-b) and 

the “Dice fu in 589 Dongshen sanlu 23a-b. 



Poul Andersen 



[ 9 S 2 ] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 



Taishang qixing shenzhou jing ic h t M 4 JX IM 

2 fols. 

383 (fasc. 182) 

“Scripture of the Divine Formula of the Seven Stars of the Most High.” What is the 
origin of misfortune ? Huang-Lao yuandi ff 4- ft asks Tianlao ^ ^ . It comes from 
the stars, replies the latter. But a Taoist knows how to expel baleful qi and lengthen his 
years. The best way to accomplish this task is to perform the Paces ofYu while pronounc- 
ing the “divine formula of the seven stars” of the Northern Dipper. This formula is 
given at the end of the present text, but it does not mention the stars of the Dipper. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang xuanling doumu dasheng yuanjun benming yansheng xinjing 

3 fols. 

Southern Song (1127-1279)? 

621 (fasc. 341) 

“Book of the Heart for Prolonging Life of the Most Sacred Goddess Mother of 
the Dipper of Mysterious Power.” This short scripture, listed second in the category 
of fundamental scriptures (benwen ^ ) of the Dongshen division, is related to the 

group of liturgical scriptures for the cult of the Dipper stars 622-629. It is more par- 
ticularly cognate to 622 Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansheng zhenjing and 623 
Taishang xuanling beidou benming changsheng miaojing, with which it shares the epithet 
of xuanling. The Mother of the Dipper is the Taoist adaptation of Marlci, the personi- 
fication of light whose cult, introduced through Tantric Buddhism, became popular in 
Taoism from Southern Song times on. She is depicted here as the mother of the gods 
of the stars of the Beidou 4L4, which are represented as emanations from her body. 
The text describes her icon and provides the formulas for invoking her presence. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansheng zhenjing 

9 fols. 

622 (fasc. 341) 

Taishang xuanling beidou benming changsheng miaojing 

3 fols. 

623 (fasc. 341) 

“Book of the Northern Dipper of Mysterious Power Prolonging the Original Life 
Span.” This most revered of all modern Taoist scriptures is mentioned in passing in 



3. B.l Zhengyi [ 9S3 ] 



the Junzhai dushu zhi 16.765-66: “Books like the Beidou jing, which pretends to have 
been revealed by Laozi in the year 155 (Yongshou 1), and moreover is vile and ridicu- 
lous, even if it is much in circulation nowadays, must nevertheless be omitted.’ Bo 
Yuchan {1307 Haiqiong Bo zhenrenyulu 1.2b, 3a) praises the book, and 1224 Daomen 
dingzhi 5.19a prescribes its recitation in a liturgical service. It probably appeared in 
Song times. However, many elements of this scripture. date from earlier periods. 
Compare, for example, 126s Beidi qiyuan ziting yansheng bijue. 

The setting of the revelation, as related by the scripture itself, is Chengdu in 155 
A.D., where Laojun appears to Zhang Daoling SSilES on a jade throne (yuju 3£/lj, 
since then the name of the Chengdu diocese). A similar setting is found in the cognate 

scriptures 624-627. 
bibliography 

Xiao Denefu, “Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansheng zhenjing ’ ( 1 - 2 ). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang shuo nandou liusi yanshou duren miaojing 
6 fols. 

624 (fasc. 341) 

Taishang shuo dongdou zhusuan burning miaojing 

3 fols. 

625 (fasc. 341) 

Taishang shuo xidou jiming hushen miaojing ± ± ffi 4 IS % M M VP I® 

4 fols. 

626 (fasc. 341) 

Taishang shuo zhongdou dakui baoming miaojing ^±b^ + 4 
4 fols. 

627 (fasc. 341) 

“Books of the Southern, the Eastern, the Western, and the Center Dippers. These 
four books concerning the imaginary Dipper Constellations complementing the 
Northern Dipper belong to the same group as to Taishang xuanling beidou benmmg 
yansheng zhenjing , of which they are directional sequels. This relationship is explained 
'in a preface to 624 Taishang shuo nandou liusi yanshou duren miaojing; this preface is 
attributed to Zhang Daoling’s 4SM disciple Zhao Sheng The emphasis on 

the legendary and historical elements in the cult of the First Heavenly Master suggests 



[ 9S4 ] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [ 9 SS ] 



that these scriptures of the Five Bushels were produced by the Zhengyi school of the 
Southern Song period (1127-1279). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Little, Taoism and the arts of China , 246-47; Xiao Dengfu, “ Taishang shuo nandou liusiyan- 
shou duren miaojing. ” 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang shuo zhongdou dakui zhangsuan fumo shenzhou jing 

2 fols. 

628 (fasc. 628) 

“Divine Spell Scripture of the Central Dipper, the Great Chief Supervising Fate and 
Subduing Demons.” This is a short apotropaic text to be recited by individuals, and 
that has the function of a spell. A kind of exorcistic imitation of 620 Taishang laojun 
shuo chang qingjing miaojing , the present text never mentions the Central Dipper and 
appears to have no link with the Dipper cult, in spite of the title. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang beidou ershiba zhang jing _h JL 4 — A 

28 fols. 

629 (fasc.341) 

“Northern Dipper Scripture in Twenty-eight Chapters.” This is a long scripture in 
twenty-eight sections {zhang $ ) of uneven length concerning the cult of the Dip- 
per. The introduction (ia-b) relates that Emperor Ming of the Flan Dynasty, when 
taking a walk in the Zhongshan Mountains, met a young girl who refused to salute 
him, saying: “I am the star that governs the constellation of the Dipper. Who are you 
(compared to me) ?” She then explains that she is in fact seven persons at die same dme 
and proceeds to reveal all there is to know about the Dipper and the stars of Fate. 

This rambling text borrows from 622 Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansheng 
zhenjing (27a-b). In the first chapters, the goddess, Doumu if #§ (Marlci), who is 
never named, addresses herself to a certain Shengming while later (5a ff.) she 
engages in a dialogue with the emperor. There are no precise indications as to the date 
of this comparatively late and popular text. 

Kristofer Schipper 



Taishang jinhua tianzun jiujie burning miaojing 

3 fols. 

1196 (fasc. 875) 

“Scripture by the Most Fiigh Heavenly Worthy Jinhua That Saves from the Apoca- 
lypse and Protects Life.” This is a popular text of uncertain date, written mosdy in five- 
syllable verse, for the invocation of the stars of the Dipper and other cosmic deities, 
to obtain redemption from the kalpa (jie £fj ). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Zhongtian ziwei xingzhen baochan 4 ^ ^ JlSf tic 

7 fols. 

1450 (fasc. 1063) 

“Precious Litany of the Stellar Gods of Ziwei.” This litany of repentance and saluta- 
tion centers on Ziwei dadi and the astral deities governed by him. We also 

find here the parents of the Northern Dippper (Doufu if 5£ and Doumu if ff ; cf. 4 s 
Tuqing wushang lingbao ziran beidou bensheng zhenjing ), the imperial couple of sun and 
moon (Rigong yanguang taiyang dijun and Yuefu suyao taiyin 

huangjun N /fF ^ I® Is ll S ), the traditional divinities of the stellar constellations, 
and the popular Three Stars of Good Luck (Shangqing fu lu shou sanlao xingjun_h 
(fl fg f|c ff H ^ H ), who became prominent in Taoist liturgy only during Ming 
(1368-1644) times (cf., e.g., 492 Jinlu qishou zoo, wu, wanchaoyi 1.2b). The litany is still 
in use today in Taiwan (see Ofuchi Ninji, Chugokujin no shukyd girei, 698-701). 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

Taishang yuanshi tianzun shuo xiaotian chonghuang jing 

2 fols. 

67 (fasc. 32) 

“Scripture for Dispelling Plagues of Insects and Locusts, Pronounced by the Most 
High Heavenly Worthy of the Primordial Beginning.” In response to a question by 
Taiji zhenren it A as to why there had recently been crop failures due to un- 
timely weather and plagues of locusts, the Heavenly Worthy of the Primordial Begin- 
ning explains that this was the punishment for a farming population that wasted their 
crops and was ungrateful for their plentiful harvests. The Heavenly Worthy was now 
about to dispatch various divinities to extinguish the afflictions. In return, the people 
should improve their conduct, establish a sacred area, offer sacrifices, and invoke the 
divinities. 



u 



[ 9S6 ] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 

The recitation of this scripture was probably part of a minor jiao 0 # -Offering, 
held when a rural community was threatened by locusts. Various rituals for the same 
purpose are found, for example, in 466 Lingbao ling jiao jidu jinshu 259 or 1224 Daomen 
dingzhi 7.2S2-302. 

Hans- Hermann Schmidt 

Taishang anzhen jiulei longshen miaojing _h $ fi II ft If 

2 fols. 

68 (fasc. 32) 

“Marvelous Scripture of the Most High for the Settling in Place of the Dragon- 
Spirits of the Nine Layers of the Earth.” Taishang yuanshi tianzun ,iv_h 7 c£p 5 ^@ is 
holding court in the Dongyang heaven when a zhenren, “holding upright his court 
tablet,” asks the Tianzun for an expedient method (fangbian fj {M) that will help in- 
habitants of the Yanfu fU world overcome the ill fortune caused by their building 
projects. The Tianzun responds with a text describing the origin in Chaos (hundong 
/MM) of the thirty-six sovereigns of the Earth. Although the present text does not say 
so, these are the same sovereigns who, according to 1373 Shangqing waiguo fangpin 
Qingtong neiwen, rule over the Nine Layers ( jiulei A.H) of the Earth (there are four 
sovereigns per layer, one for each direction). These sovereigns alone have “received 
their position from the emperor,” and all other spirits (listed by the Tianzun at the 
end of his hymn) who might take offense at the various types of construction must, 
upon recitation of this text, “hide themselves, return whence they came, secure [zben 
$8 ] their corner or their direction, and cause no ill.” The function of the text is thus 
to “settle in place the dragon-spirits of the Nine Layers” and to “thank and dismiss” 
(i mngxie MM) all other Earth spirits. 

John Lagerwey 

Yuanshi tianzun shuo shiyi yao da xiaozai shenzhoujing 

6 fols. 

43 (fasc. 29) 

“The Yuanshi Tianzun Proffers the Scripture of the Divine Incantations of the 
Eleven Great Luminaries for the Elimination of Calamities.” As the translation of 
the title suggests, yao M and daj\ 'm the tide should be inverted, as in 198 Shangqing 
shiyi dayao dengyi. This lamp ritual contains the same formulas as the latter text for the 
Eleven Luminaries— the sun, the moon, the five planets, and four stars— that provoke 
disasters. The same list is found in a Buddhist sutra that Hou Ching-lang dates to the 
fourteenth century ( Monnaies d’ojfrandes , 87, and “The Chinese belief in baleful stars” 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [ 9S7 ] 

206). The recitation of the present text is already mentioned at the end of the twelfth 
century in 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa 33.5b and 1224 Daomen dingzhi 5.5b. 
The latter also mentions a form of Hetu Offering [MJ §£ that is presided over by the 
same eleven heavenly bodies (6.2b; cf. also 3.11a and 8.iob-i4b). The attribution of 
this text to Taishang (sic) is criticized by Bo Yuchan (1307 Haiqiong Bo zhenren yulu 
1.13b). 

In addition to the incantations addressed to the eleven luminaries, this text contains 
two more general formulas, one for the nine stars of the Big Dipper, the other for the 
five planets (the latter formula is used as a weiling zhou HjM/l in 466 Lingbao lingjiao 
jidu jinshu 11.5b). All of the incantations are revealed by Yuanshi tianzun in response 
to a question of Qingluo zhenren W H R A on the cause of and appropriate response 
to calamities, especially natural catastrophes. The Tianzun’s explanation is essentially 
mechanistic. The calamities consequently strike good and evil, rich and poor alike. 
The victims should fabricate earthen images of the eleven divinities and recite the 
incantations in the present text, or have them recited by a Taoist for a period of seven 
to twenty-one days. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang dongzhen anzao jingj ^- h M R $ B 

2 fols. 

69 (fasc. 32) 

“Scripture of the Most High for the Placation of the Stove God, from the Dong- 
zhen Canon.” Robert Chard (“Master of the family,” 217-23) gives a complete resume 
of this text and considers it to be the oldest— possibly of Song date (960-1279)— of 
the three works in the Daozang concerning the Stove God cult. 

During an “audience before the Origin” ( chaoyuan ^7C) of all the gods of the 
Three Worlds, the Mother of the Flames (Chuimu tXM) presents herself before the 
cinnabar throne; in her quality as petty officer of the Emperor of the North (Beidi 
jjC 'Sr ) she is a Director of Destiny (Siming 0 ] dp ) and Commissioned Officer of the 
Heavenly Offices (zhiju SKF), whose duty it is to supervise all the transformations 
between the raw and the cooked and to note down all infractions of the taboos. Each 
day of the new moon, she ascends to Heaven to make a report and to “wait for the 
saintly instructions.” 

These instructions are given here, in gdthd form, at the end of die scripture: to love 
oneself means to love the Tao, because the Tao loves life; to worship the Director of 
Destiny assures peace in the home, because thus “the thousand evil forces have no 
means of returning.” 

Before this gdthd, the Most High describes briefly the taboos to be observed in 







[ 9SS ] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 

front of the hearth and the monthly offerings that should be made to the goddess and 
to the divine maidens of the Six Gui A periods. After the gathd, all those present 
promise “to follow forever the instructions of the Saint.” 

The term dongzhen ?[5] (H in the tide of this scripture is no doubt a result of its inclu- 
sion in that section of the Ming Daozang. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Chard, “Master of the family.” 

John Lagenvey 

Taishang lingbao buxie za.owa.ng jing yfc _h M 'ff M slf fS 3 i f ? 

3 fols. 

364 (fasc. 180) 

“Scripture for Asking Pardon of the Stove Queen.” Robert Chard considers this 
text later than 69 Taishang dongxuan anzao jing (see his translation and comments in 
“Master of the family,” 223-32). In particular, the myth of the cosmic deity the Old 
Mother is here far more developed than in the Anzao jing. The scripture opens with 
a zhenren asking the Tianzun who the Old Mother living alone on Kunlun was. The 
Tianzun replies that it was the Mother of the Flames (Chuimu 'JfcM)- In Heaven she 
was called Celestial Empress (Tianhou j^la) and on Earth Director of Destiny (Si- 
ming W] op ). She is the emissary of the Seven Principles of the Northern Dipper and 
also plays the roles of the five directional lords of the stove. She controls a family’s 
destiny by reporting to Heaven on its members’ behavior on the day of the new moon 
at midnight. People should, therefore, most scrupulously respect the taboos associated 
with the stove, and whenever they break them, they should “make amends and excuse 
themselves” ( buxie ) to the goddess of the stove and all her family. “I myself will 
ask the Old Mother to forgive them” concludes the Tianzun. 

The zhenren then composes a short summary of the text in the form of a hymn, 
and the Tianzun finishes by recommending that the faithful invite a Taoist to make an 
offering to the goddess of the stove whenever they encounter difficulties. 

John Lagenvey 

Taishang yuanshi tianzun shuo jin guangming jing 

2 fols. 

70 (fasc. 32) 

“Scripture of the Golden Light, Pronounced by the Most High Heavenly Worthy 
of the Primordial Beginning.” In this short text, the Heavenly Worthy of Primordial 
Beginning promises to cure to all those who have lost their eyesight as a result of epi- 
demic diseases, or whose eyes have been damaged by other unlucky circumstances. If 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [ 9S9 ] 

the devotee establishes a sacred area ( daochang jjf£§) and recites this scripture, twelve 
Divine Lads named Goldlight, Moonlight, Sunlight, and so on, will appear and put 
an end to all calamities and restore the eyesight of the believer. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Yuanshi tianzun shuo sanguan baohao ji ng jt jz W stt H Hf U ^ IS 

2 fols. 

71 (fasc. 32) 

“The Heavenly Worthy of the Primordial Beginning Utters the Precious Titles of 
the Three Officials.” While the Heavenly Worthy is preaching in Daluo Heaven 

the Barefoot Immortal (Chijiao daxian MAffil) asks him how to dispell 
the misfortunes that plague human beings. Let them recite “the precious titles of the 
Three Officers,” responds the Heavenly Worthy, and proceeds to utter them himself. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao tianzun shuo yangcan yingzhong jing 

9 fols. 

360 (fasc. 179) 

“Lingbao Tianzun Preaches the Scripture on Silkworm Cultivation.” Lingbao tian- 
zun W. irt jc begins by explaining to Taishang laojun h f S the importance in 

the lives of the people of silkworm cultivation and the care of silkworm eggs. Laojun 
confirms that silkworm cultivation goes back to the saints of antiquity and that people 
need only to worship in front of the statues of the Tianzun in order to ensure a good 
harvest (of worms). Because the people are sinful, however, punishment is inevitable. 
Every year in spring they should burn incense and set out silkworm eggs in the four 
directions and in the middle of the fields and then invoke the gods who protect silk- 
worms. They should also burn incense, prepare an offering to the gods in a Taoist 
sacred area ( daochang jjf^), and invite a Taoist priest to recite the present text. 

Lingbao tianzun then utters a “formula for commanding demons” and tells the 
faithful to show the silkworms they have placed in the fields to tire priest. The priest 
is to pronounce the demon-quelling formula over the silkworms, and then another 
formula for the multiplication of the worms. No sooner has the priest entered the 
house, adds the Tianzun, than the demons will flee. 

In the rest of the text, the Tianzun further explains to the faithful the nature of ritual 
efficacity and of the system of retribution, and he menaces the demons with death if 
they do not leave a house where such rituals are performed. Exorcism of this sort, 
concludes the text, had been entrusted to priests of the Heavenly Master order. 

John Lagenvey 





[ p6o ] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 



Taishang shuo liyi canwang m iaoji ng ^ . h 1 0 S IS IE I? 

2 fols. 

365 (fasc. 180) 

“Scripture for the Multiplication of the Silkworm King.” In the Land of Pure Lu- 
minosity, in the Palace of Red Luminosity, the zhenren of Lunar Purity describes for 
Lingbao tianzun the sufferings of the people on Earth due to their want of clothing. 
The Tianzun then sends the zhenren of the Mysterious Name to Earth to turn himself 
into a silkworm and teach people how to make fabrics from the silken threads spun 
by the worms. The zhenren explains that one must take good care of the silkworms, 
for they are his body. In order to help “the king of the silkworms to multiply” the text 
supplies a “divine fu” that will keep all demons away from the king. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang zhao zhu shenlong anzhen fenmu jing _t 0 ft? f I $ HI fft M 

3 fols. 

363 (fasc. 180) 

“Scripture of the Most High Summoning the Various Divine Dragons to Guard 
Tombs.” This text is an elaboration of 33s Taishang dongyuan shenzhou jing 17 (see 
Mollier, Une apocalypse taoiste , 64). The Most High Lord of the Way goes “before 
dawn” ( kaiguang fnl'ft) to find Yuanshi tianzun in the Yanggu wilds and to 

tell him that people bury their dead in the hopes of having a multitude of wealthy 
descendants. If poverty is the rule nowadays, responds the Tianzun, it is because “the 
generations of the past did not believe in the methods of the Tao and did not plant 
good karma.” People should find a Superior Taoist {gaoshang daoshi jn 5 _hxMlt) to 
perform a ritual in which they confess their sins and invite the dragon-kings to guard 
their tombs. 

The Tianzun himself then summons the divine dragon-kings and tells them to do 
what is asked of them in the future. The scripture ends with a “word of the Tao” that 
enjoins the people to invite a Zhengyi Taoist to perform the ritual. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang shuo niuhuang miaojing ic . h I£ 'E SI IS 

2 fols. 

366 (fasc. 180) 

“Scripture for Healing Cattle Plague.” This scripture was for use in a ritual of exor- 
cism of the said cattle disease. The date is uncertain. 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [ 961 ] 

Taishang xuhuang baosheng shenzhou jing is. il HH EE Etc (E 1$ ;l M 

I fol. 

384 (fasc. 182) 

“Scripture of the Divine Formula for Protecting Life, [Taught] by the Most High 
Sovereign of the Void.” The formula is in rhymed verse of four characters per line; 
it ends with an invocation of the spirits of the Five Directions. The text refers to the 
Zhengyi order of Taoism. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang sansheng jieyuan miaojing 

6 fols. 

387 (fasc. 182) 

“Marvelous Book for Dispelling Hereditary Enmity through Three Generations.” 
This modern popular scripture tells the story of Jiuku tianzun who comes 

from the east to preach the Law in a small kingdom of the west. The queen is bar- 
ren, and the Tianzun explains that this is because in her former life, when she lived 
in China, she had lost an unborn child. The latter, reborn as a yaksa, is called up and 
appears to his former mother. Then the god gives to the queen the present book, 
which he himself has formerly obtained from the Zhengyi tianzun IE — ^ Ift . The god 
instructs her to recite the book and to invite Zhengyi masters to perform a service at 
the moment of childbirth. Three talismans for the protection of the mother and the 
speeding of delivery are added. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang zhengyi chaotian sanba xiezui fachan _E IE ‘ ^ A It] P tffit 

II fols. 

Yuan (1279-1368) or early Ming (1368-1644) 

813 (fasc. 567) 

“Litany of Twenty-four Supplications for Forgiveness in the Zhengyi Audience to 
Heaven.” Instead of twenty-four, the formulas for repentance in this ritual number 
only eleven. Each time, the Jade Proclamation ( yugao lEIn)— that is, the solemn tide 
ofYuhuang shangdi E.iJjl'fE in sixty-two characters (4a)— is recited ten times. 

The canonization tide of the First Heavenly Master as given on ia corresponds to 
that conferred in the year 1295 (see 14-63 Han tianshi shijia 1.8a). This ritual is therefore 
a litany for the pure liturgy by the Longhu shan [ 1 1 Heavenly Master order. 

Kristofer Schipper 



Kristofer Schipper 




[ 962 ] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [ 963 ] 



Zhushi shengdan chongju zhuoxian yi M §? M. ^ ^ S\J IK 

13 fols. 

482 (fasc. 265) 

“Ritual for the Presentation of Offerings on the Anniversaries of the Birthdays and 
the Ascensions of the Various Masters.” The anniversaries thus celebrated are those 
ofYuhuang (1/9), Laojun (2/15), and Xuantian shangdi (3/3 and 9/9). 

Zhang Daoling shares in the offering performed on 9/9. The titles of the vari- 

ous gods are of Ming date. 

John Lagerwey 

3.B.l.b Lamp Rituals 

Lamp rituals ( dengyi J$f|t ) were known already in the fifth century. The 1411 Dong- 
xutm lingbao changye zhi fit jiuyou yugui mingzhen ke gives details for two types: one 
designed to save the souls of the dead from the “darkness of the Long Night” the 
other to prevent natural disasters, epidemics, and any unlucky event. These early ritu- 
als, which consist in the successive lighting of a symbolic number of lamps, already 
include a confession of sins and expression of wishes. 

In S07 Taishang hucinglu zhctiyi 56, Du Guangting gives the classical form to and 
definition of this method for worshiping with lamps (lideng zhi fit He 

attributes the method to the Jinlujianwen a text of the fifth century that is 

no longer extant. According to Du, “the most important matters in a zhai- ritual are 
the burning of incense and the lighting of lamps” (56.1a). The incense is the means 
for communicating with Heaven; the lamps dissipate the obscurity of the hells. Du 
indicates various times for “praying over the lamps” ( zhoudeng /EjE§), but the most 
important time is at the end of the day, after the evening Audience ritual. The rite 
begins at the Gate of Earth and ends in front of the Master in the Beyond ( xuanshi 
I® ). The adept is then to leave the lamps burning until dawn. Du still follows the order 
given in the above-mentioned 1411 Mingzhen ke (E, S, W, N; NE, SE, SW, NW); the 
final prayer, for the lamp of the underworld, is missing in Du’s text. 

The various liturgical manuals of the Southern Song (1127-12 79) and the Yuan 
(1279-1368) make clear that there was a proliferation of lamp rituals. The 1221 Shang- 
qing lingbao dafa 34 gives diagrams for nine, and 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu gives 
texts for ten such rituals (juan 15, 25, 34, 35, 127, 174, 199, 200, 236). The lighting of 
lamps at the end of the day continues to be recommended (466 Jidu jinshu 2.6a), but 
it is also to be done at the start of a full-scale Retreat ( zhengzhai JEH), so as to light 
the path to the sacred area and thereby enable die souls of the deceased to be present 
during the Retreat ( 1221 Lingbao dafa 34.14b). In general, the function of the lamps is 
to “dispel the obscurity” ( poan ) of the hells. 



With one exception— 475 Hongen lingji zhenjun qizhengxing dengyi— aH lamp ritu- 
als that do not form part of, or are not closely related to, the large liturgical manuals 
are placed together in the Doozang. Although the present group of rituals hardly con- 
stitutes a coherent ensemble, the rituals do seem to have been reworked by a single 
editor: with two exceptions {199 Nandou yanshou dengyi, and 200 Beidou qiyuan xing 
dengyi ), the recitation of a sacred text is required at the end of the ritual (cf. 466 Jidu 
jinshu 35.8b) ; the reading of a memorial ( shu ®ft ) is also required in nine of the nineteen 
rituals. The same formula of homage (zhixin guiming nr?) is used in thirteen 

texts (cf. 466 Jidu jinshu 199), and the same manner of expressing wishes in front of 
the lamps (fiuyuan ffiW) in fourteen texts (cf. 466 Jidu jinshu 25). 

The fact that these lamp rituals almost always precede the recitation of a sacred text 
is a fairly good indication that each of the nineteen liturgies originally constituted the 
core of a full, albeit short, ritual. The larger ritual context is that of an Offering (jiao 
9 $ or gong fft) in twelve cases (texts 198-203 , 20S-210) and of a Retreat (zhai ffl) in four 
(211-214). Most of these rituals were performed for individuals (called “disciples” [dizi 
jfj-f] in texts 199, 201, 204 , 207; “believers” [xinshi (H i ] in 209-210 ; “so-and-so” [mou 
in 200, 202, 203, 203-207 ) or for heads of families or neighborhoods ( jiaozhaiguan - 
shi SI If Ilf ± ; 198 , 208, 211-214). In some cases, the priest’s invitation from the faithful 
is described: “having chosen a member of the One and Orthodox sect” (198); “having 
invited a True Friend” (200)3 “with the help of a feathered gentleman” (204, 210). 

Tuhuang shiqi ciguang dengyi 3 £ ii + 1 M it $1 US 

20 fols. 

197 (fasc. 83) 

“Seventeen Lights of the Compassion of the Jade Emperor.” The title refers to 
the seventeen aspects of the Jade Emperor’s salvific light, enumerated in 10 Gaoshang 
yuhuang benxing jijing i.9b-ioa. He who “meditates on these aspects of the Worthy 
One and praises his names will be enabled to see the face of the Compassionate One 
[ciyan MM] and will be saved” (1.11a). The present text, which begins with a hymn 
taken from the Tuhuang jing (i.8b-9a) and ends with the recitation of 13 Gaoshang 
yuhuang xinyin jing, uses the same term for “to praise” ( chengyang f$$§) as does the 
yuhuang jing before each of its seventeen hymns to the Jade Emperor. 

John Lagerwey 

Shangqing shiyi dayao dengyi h frf \ 

8 fols. 

198 (fasc. 83) 

“Lamp Ritual of the Eleven Great Luminaries.” The main body of this text is com- 
posed of the same eleven hymns found in 43 Tuanshi tianzun shuo shiyi yao da xiaozai 




[ 964 ] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 

shenzhou jing. The rite is part of a Pure Offering (qinggong performed by a 

Zhengyi IE — priest in order to avert catastrophes linked to the “eleven greater heav- 
enly bodies.” A jiao H dedicated to these eleven bodies is mentioned in 1224 Daomen 
dingzhi 8.10a. 

John Lagerwey 

Nandou yanshou dengyi jfj i\- jfp ff§ 

6 fols. 

199 (fasc. 183) 

“Southern Dipper Lamp Ritual for Prolonging Life.” The Southern Dipper of the 
title of this text is the Heavenly seat of longevity, object of the Offering (jiaoli SIM) of 
which the present rite forms a part. In order to perform this Offering, which identifies 
itself' as belonging to both the Lingbao tradition and the Hern jiao ( 5 J [M[ , one must 

first establish an astral sacred area ( xingtan Mfl) and invite all the divinities whose 
names are given at the beginning of the text. The list of divinities is the same as for 198 
Shangqing shiyi dayao dengyi. 

The work 1224 Daomen dingzhi mentions (6.3a) an Offering made simultaneously 
to the divinities of the Northern and Southern Dippers in order to obtain longevity; 
this work treats the Offering as a kind of Hetujiao. The prayers given in 1224 Daomen 
dingzhi (8.i4b-i7b), however, correspond not to those given here but to those in 624 
Taishang shuo nandou liusi yanshou duren miaojing. 

John Lagerwey 

Beidou qiyuan xing dengyi 

7 fols. 

200 (fasc. 83) 

“Lamp Ritual for the Seven Principles of the Northern Dipper.” The wishes ex- 
pressed in this ritual addressed to the seven stars of the Northern Dipper ask for the 
forgiveness of sins, success for mandarins and merchants, conjugal harmony, and 
happy descendants. 

The work 1224 Daomen dingzhi mentions (6.3a) an Offering addressed “exclusively 
to the Seven Principles” of the Northern Dipper. The name of this ritual recalls the 
title of 622 Taishang xuanling beidou beaming yansheng zhenjing , but the prayers given 
in the Daomen dingzhi (8.i7b-2ia) are those of 733 Beidou qiyuan jinxuan yuzhang , not 
those of the present text. 

John Lagerwey 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [96s] 



Beidou beaming yanshou dengyi \\j ^ ni? ffl 

4 fols. 

201 (fasc. 83) 

“Lamp Ritual of Northern Dipper Individual Destiny for Extending Longevity.” 
The destiny of every human being is determined by the lord of the seven stars of the 
Northern Dipper associated with his or her birth date. People should “invite a True 
Friend” to celebrate the present ritual of confession and wishes on their birthday. 

Contrary to 199 Nandou yanshou dengyi and 200 Beidou qiyuan xing dengyi, each 
of which is composed of a number of prose and verse sections equal to the number 
of stars in the Southern or Northern Dippers, this text contains only five such sec- 
tions— one for each of the five directions, no doubt— each of which is addressed to an 
astral lord of Fundamental Destiny ( beaming $nn )• 

John Lagerwey 

Sanguan dengyi H tf f§ {jf 

4 fols. 

202 (fasc. 83) 

“Lamp Ritual of the Three Officials.” This lamp ritual belongs to a Pure Offering 
performed for an individual on the days of the Three Principles, on which days “the 
Three Officials correct the accounts and the Nine Heavens grant happiness.” 

John Lagerwey 

Xuandi dengyi 

5 fols. 

203 (fasc. 83) 

“Lamp Ritual for the Emperor of the North.” The Pure Offering into which this 
lamp ritual is to be inserted is in honor of Xuantian shangdi ■ The tide given 

to him in the text, Lingying yousheng zhenjun 'H M jfi ® R S , was first accorded this 
god in 1108. 

The first of the wishes expressed in the present ritual asks for the forgiveness of the 
sins of “so-and-so” and for eternal life; the second wish asks the same thing for all the 
deceased of the family; and the third wish requests happiness for all members, living 
and dead, of the family. 

1224 Daomen dingzhi mentions (6.4b) a Beiji zhenwu jiao R • 

John Lagerwey 



[ 966 ] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [967] 



Jiutian San Mao siming xian dengyi E E E pjj f[I) 

5 fols. 

204 (fasc. 83) 

“Lamp Ritual in Honor of the Director of Destiny of the Nine Heavens and His 
Brothers.” This ritual was to be held on the festival days of the immortalized Mao 
brothers: in the third month and on the second day of the twelfth month. The deities, 
whose presence is symbolically indicated by the unrolling of their images, are invoked 
one after another, offered incense and flowers, and praised in hymns. The text of 
these hymns comes, with slight modifications, from a famous inscription in honor of 
the brothers that was engraved on a stele on Maoshan [if in 522 (see “Tianhuang 
taidi shou Maojun jiuxi yuce wen 304 Maoshan zhi 

i.ia-2b). 

Since the honorary tides of the patron saints contain the expansions zhenying yt fg, 
miaoying and shenying bestowed upon them in 1316 (see “Yanyou jiahao 
sanjun liguan sanfeng gao I E H H ttjl la ” 304 Maoshan zhi 4.i9a-2ia), 

the date “forty-second year of the holy government” (239) could refer to the year 1321. 
However, if we take into account the other texts of this group (197-203) some of which 
seem to date to the Ming, the reference could also be to the year 1409. 

Ursula- Angelika Cedzich 

Wanting dengyi ,% M fH 

4 fols. 

205 (fasc. 83) 

“Lamp Ritual for the Myriad Spirits.” This text forms part of a Pure Offering ad- 
dressed to the divinity of one’s choice, rather than to all divinities, as the tide would 
seem to suggest. The intendons are general in character: for the prosperity of the 
country, the family, and all beings. 

John Lagerwey 

Wuxian lingguan dadi dengyi E M HE ; ri? ft! fH 

5 fols. 

206 (fasc. 83) 

“Lamp Ritual in Honor of the Great Emperors Five Manifestations of Divine 
Contemplation.” The five deities invoked in this brief ritual have their origin in the 
widespread southern Chinese cult of the Five Supernatural Powers (Wutong EM), 
a class of ancient, one-legged nature demons. In 1109 a Wutong sanctuary in Wuyuan 
(Jiangxi), which — obviously under Buddhist influence— had successfully cleaned up 
the images of its gods, was officially recognized, while in mi the Wutong spirits in 
general were declared objects of an illicit cult (Song huiyaojigao 1:771-72 and 843). 



Over the following centuries, the cult of the five deities of Wuyuan— who, after 
an official change of dieir names in 1174, came to be called Wuxian EH (Five Mani- 
festations) — established numerous branch temples and became enormously popular 
throughout southern China. In the early Ming dynasty (1368-1644), the Wuxian were 
elevated to national rank. Ming Taizu ordered state offerings to be performed for the 
gods at an official temple (completed in 1389) near his capital (s ccXiyinji 5.302-322). 

Taoists categorically opposed both the illicit worship of the Wutong spirits and the 
officially sanctioned cult of the Wuxian until well into the thirteenth century (cf. 780 
Diqi shangjiang Wen taibao zhuan ib-2b). During the same period, however. Marshal 
Ma M ECT , a Taoist deity developed to fight especially the Wutong, began to take on 
the features and qualities of his victims. This process eventually resulted in a complete 
fusion of Marshal Ma with the Wutong/Wuxian and in the integration of the latter 
into the Taoist pantheon (cf. also 1192 Dahui jingci miaole tianzun shuo fude wusheng 
jing). 

The lantern ritual presents the five gods as five heavenly marshals with new Taoist 
names in addition to the titles officially granted to them in 1213. Although there is 
evidence that, in the thirteenth century, local Taoists, despite the objection of higher 
Taoist authorities, participated in die worship of die Wuxian, it is unlikely that the 
present text was adopted into this standardized collection of lantern rituals before the 
high imperial honors bestowed on the cult during the early Ming. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Cedzich, “Wu-t’ung.” 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

Tusi dengyi ± n] fS ffl 

8 fols. 

207 (fasc. 83) 

“Lamp Ritual for the Soil God.” The Pure Offering of which this rite forms a part 
is performed in order to expiate the faults committed against the god of the soil in 
the course of a recent building or moving project. The text is divided into nine parts, 
addressed to the stellar divinities in charge of the Eight Trigrams and the center. The 
tides given these divinities are close to those used in 466 Lingbao ling jiao jidu jinshu 
199. 

John Lagerwey 




[p 68 ] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [ 969 ] 



Dongchu siming dengyi JHHf S] jt§ fH 

5 fols. 

208 (fasc. 83) 

“Lamp Ritual for the Director of Destiny of the Eastern Kitchen.” After the invo- 
cation, addressed to the divine lords of a new and an old stove, a prose introduction 
explains that “the Stove [God] is the head of die household: he inquires into errors 
and judges sin. Given die importance of his position, one does well to show him the 
greatest respect.” This display of respect is what the “officer of the jiao Si” accom- 
plishes by lighting five lamps, each of which is linked to the invocation both of the 
Director of Destiny of the Eastern Kitchen (cf. the dde) and of the Stove God of one 
of the Five Directions. The Eastern Kitchen is probably related to the Eastern Peak. 
Robert Chard (“Master of the family” 232-43) gives a nearly complete translation of 
this text, which he considers to be later than 69 Taishang dongzhen anzaojing. 

John Lagerwey 

Zhengyi wensi bidu shendeng yiJE — j 5 i& 0] jtf? fj| 

5 fols. 

209 (fasc. 84) 

“Ritual of the Divine Lamps for Averting Disease, from the Zhengyi Offices of Epi- 
demics.” This ritual belongs to a Pure Offering performed for the faithful in order to 
expel the emissaries who spread epidemics in each of the Five Directions. “The Great 
Way produces epidemics,” we read, “but people bring them upon themselves. When 
the gods look into wrongdoing, one has only one’s virtue to rely on.” 

Fortunately, the “path of prayer” is wide, and all gods— whether Taoist or Buddhist, 
great warriors or sages of antiquity, painted or sculpted— give their protection to any 
region that presents them with an offering. 

John Lagerwey 

Liming ruixiang dengyi 

7 fols. 

210 (fasc. 84) 

“Lamp Ritual for Auspicious Signs from the South.” This ritual of “auspicious fu” 
belongs to an “Offering to pray for peace.” The latter serves especially to protect the 
region whose faithful have it performed from the fires sent by the gods of the Palace 
of Southern Clarity to punish sin (li M refers to the trigram of that name, a trigram 
that occupies the south and corresponds to fire). Six groups of gods, all associated with 
the south, are asked to forgive the sins of the faithful and grant them their favors. 



The work 1224 Daonren dingzhi (6.5a) mentions an Offering to Conjure the Flames 
and Drive off" Catastrophe (. Shihuo rangzai jiao % 'X J$| #£ Si )• 

John Lagerwey 

Huanglu jiuyang fanqi dengyi ft M fi P§ ££ £§ fH 

11 fols. 

211 (fasc. 84) 

“Yellow Register Lamp Ritual for the Brahman Energies of the Nine Yang.” The 
“Brahman Energies of the Nine Yang” are the qi of the Nine Heavens; they illumine 
die underworld and enable the souls of the deceased to ascend to Heaven. The ritual 
consists in invoking die Jiuku tianzun of each direction in turn and then, 

having lit a lamp, of singing the appropriate hymn from 318 Daoxuan lingbao zimn 
jiutian shengshen zhcmgjing. 

In this version, the ritual begins in the east; the version in 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu 
jinshu 25 begins in the northeast. 

John Lagerwey 

Huanglu jiuzhi dengyi If H Jl Miff! {it 

4 fols. 

212 (fasc. 84) 

“Yellow Register Lamp Ritual of Nine Goblets.” This is an abbreviated version of 
the traditional Jiuyou Retreat described in 1411 Dongxuan lingbao changye zhi 
fu jiuyou yugui mingzhen ke. There are also a number of terminological borrowings 
from $07 Taishang huanglu zhaiyi 56.ioa-i3a and 308 Wushang huanglu dazhai licheng 
yi 24.1a ff. 

John Lagerwey 

Huanglu poyu dengyi 

8 fols. 

213 (fasc. 84) 

“Yellow Register Lamp Ritual for Destroying Hell.” As in the traditional Jiuyou 
Retreat, each secuon of this ritual is addressed to one of the ten Lingbao, as 
opposed to the Jiuku tianzun. At the end of each prose paragraph, the celebrant is to 
make an act of contrition so that the soul of the deceased may escape from the difficul- 
ties associated with the hell of the respecdve direction ( channan 1 ® it ; cf. 466 Lingbao 
lingjiao jidu jinshu 35.2b, chan shendeng and 174.3a, chan moufang diyou 1® Jjt; 

UmH )- As in 466 Jidu jinshu 35, the celebrant then burns a “fu order” and, finally, 
recites a verse. 




[ 970 ] 3.B.1 Zhengyi 

The three rituals in 211 Huanglu jiuyang fctnqi dengyi, 212 Huanglu jiuzln dengyi, and 
the present text all follow the same order, starting in the east, continuing clockwise 
around to the northeast, and finishing in the center. In this ritual alone, the center is 
associated with the “lower direction,” thus accentuating the dramatic character of this 
ritual for the “destruction of hells.” 

John Lagerwey 

Huanglu wuku lundeng yi ff it S (IS 

5 fols. 

214 (fasc. 84) 

“Yellow Register Revolving Lamp Ritual for [Release from] The Five Sufferings.” 
This ritual of “wheel-lamps” designed to “turn the light around” (and cause it to 
shine in the underworld) associates all souls in distress with the soul of a recently 
deceased person and aims to save them from the Five Sufferings and die three forms 
of filth. It may be an abbreviated version of so8 Wushang huanglu dazhai licheng yi 
24.193-243. 

John Lagerwey 

Taiqing daode xianhua yi X ft H Hi \ t fi 

20 fols. 

Ming (1318-1644) 

793 (fasc. 564) 

“Ritual for the Epiphany of [the Heavenly Worthy] of the Way and Its Power of 
the Taiqing [Heaven].” This is a service to be celebrated on the occasion of Laozi’s 
birthday, on the fifteenth day of the second moon (ib). Laozi’s canonical tide here is 
Taiqing xuanyuan wushang santian wuji dadao taishang laojun daode tianzun E'/ltE 

the third of the Sanqing triad and thus, 
according to modern cosmology, the ruler of the Taiqing Heaven. 

The latest manifestation ( xianhua HHfc) to be mentioned (2a) is Laozi’s appearance 
on Maoshan (in 1109, to Liang Wuzhen R , revealing to the latter the Jiaqu Tian- 
tong burning miaojing /JH'uJ 7^ £& sfl ; see 632 Taishang taiqing tiantong burning 

miaojing 5a). 

The service is composed of three parts. The first ritual is an offering for the birthday 
( sbangshougongxian h M ; ia-7b). Incense, flowers, candles, tea, wine, and fruits 
are offered in succession. The second ritual is an homage to the epiphany ( xianhua 
liwen 7b-i5a), which celebrates with hymns and recitations nine stages in 

the manifestations of Laozi in this world, the fourth one corresponding to the revela- 
tion of the doctrine of the Zhengyi order ( zhengyi zhi zongjiao IE — 10b). 



3. B.l Zhengyi [ 971 ] 

The final ritual is the jiao Si (xianhua shejiao yi ® [EixKtSi ; i5a-2oa). It is of a simple 
daochang type and is structured around three libations of wine. 

The hymns throughout are in seven-character lines and distinctly vernacular in 
character. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Shangqing dongxuan mingdeng shangjing h (i! ?[ 5 ] % RjJ f?? i: 

7 fols. 

367 (fasc. 180) 

“Scripture of Lighting Lamps, of the Shangqing Dongxuan Canon.” The classifica- 
tory title Shangqing dongxuan indicates that this text is cognate with the Shangqing 
lingbao dafa liturgy. The text does not follow the usual scriptural model and provides 
no clues for dating. It expounds in highly ornate classical language the importance of 
the ritual of lighting lamps and singing hymns while they bum, and of the celebration 
of Retreats for the atonement of sins (ib). The more lamps are lit the better, and those 
who practice this ritual during three years will rise up to Heaven in broad daylight. 
One of the lights is the Prince of Lamps (dengwang ‘M JE), and in his honor four 
stanzas of a classical hymn are chanted. Then follow nineteen other stanzas. The work 
closes with a formula for the Feeding of the Hungry Ghosts (shishi zhongsheng chou Jfg 

Kristofer Schipper 

3.B.1.C Registers and Talismans 

Taishang sanwu zhengyi mengwei /w;fe_L.HEjE — iSlsEH 

6 juan 

1208 (fasc. 877) 

“Register of the Sworn Alliance with the Powers of the Orthodox One.” According 
to many early sources, such as 120s Santian neijiejing 1.6a, the registers of the Sworn 
Alliance were originally bestowed on Zhang Daoling by Laozi in 142. It is, 

however, doubtful that the present version of twenty-four apotropaic talismans rep- 
resents the original revelation. 

The same series is quoted in 6 is Chisong zi zhangli 4.22a-b under the general title 
“Ritual Registers in Twenty-four Degrees.” It can again be found in 1212 Jiao sandong 
zhenwen wufa zhengyi mengwei lu licheng yi by Zhang Wanfu, and in 796 Taishang 
sanwu zhengyi mengwei yuelu jiaoyi by Du Guangting. 

In the present version, the twenty-four talismans are connected to the Twenty-four 
Dioceses ( zhi Ja) and to the Twenty-eight Stellar Mansions (xiu f§). Among the 
locations given for the different zhi, we find the name of Huai’an jun for the 



[ 972 ] 3.B. 1 Zhengyi 



3.B.1 Zhengyi [973 ] 



Changli zhi H ^IJ '/E . Huai’an jun is a military district created in 997. The present ver- 
sion of this register must, therefore, date from the Song period (960-1279). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang zhengyi yansheng booming /m /E tl ilE ' H 

10 fols. 

1216 (fasc. 880) 

“Life-Prolonging and Destiny-Protecting Register, of the Zhengyi School.” This is 
a protective talismanic register for lay people, issued in print by the Longhu shan fg 
#E|JL|, and signed by Zhang Yuqing (#, the Forty-fourth Heavenly Master (d. 
1427)- The attestation of transmission and the introduction to the register, in the form 
of a short scripture, give the impression that this register belongs to an earlier stratum 
and can be compared to similar documents from the Tang and early Song dynasties 
(compare 1209 Taishan zhengyi mengwei falu yibu). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang zhengyi jie wuyin zhouzu bilu ^C_LIE — - ^ E s' 5 E IB I# II 

8 fols. 

1217 (fasc. 880) 

“Secret Register of the Most High for Obtaining Release from Incantations and 
Spells from All Quarters.” Like the 1216 Yansheng booming lu, this register was issued, 
originally in printed form, by the Heavenly Masters of the Longhu shan fg$g (JL[ and 

signed by the master of the 
forty-fourth generation, Zhang 
Yuqing (d. 1427). The 

register is accompanied by 
the image of an exorcist with 
a sword and a bowl of charm 
water (fig. 42). The divine 
agents of the register are the 
lords of the five kinds of bar- 
barians (Yi Man fH, Rong 

, Di , and Qin ^ ), widely 
invoked in Zhengyi rites since 
the early middle ages. 

As examples of black magic, 
the text offers: “having one’s 
portrait drawn by an evil per- 
son who then pierces the heart 



with a knife”; “having been possessed by the spirits of earth altars, sacred areas, forests, 
brooks, wells, and stoves”; “having been the victim of incantations and spells by the 
devious masters of the vulgar cults of the River God [Hebo M f£j ].” 

Kristofer Schipper 

Sidou ershiba xiu tiandi dalu 0 — + A E ??? El H 

21 fols. 

1397 (fasc. 1048) 

“Register of the Heavenly Sovereigns of the Four Dippers and the Twenty-eight 
Stellar Mansions.” This work is in fact a collection of registers, presumably for lay 
people, as there is no clearly correlated initiation or ordination ritual. Following the 
Register of the Twenty-eight Stellar Mansions mentioned in the tide, we find the 
Register of the Divine Immortals of the Five Sovereigns, Planets, and Peaks (Wudi 
wuxing wuyue shenxicm luwen fi fi? E M Ejti Wfllj II i6b-i7a), the Register of the 

Seal ofYue of the Most HighThree-and-Five Yellow Deity (Taishang sanwu huangshen 
yuezhang lu AEHEffff ® j|eII), and the Register of the Most High Three-and- 
Five Dance of Pacing the Mainstay in Exchange with Heaven (Taishan sanwu jiaoqian 
bugang The latter register consists of an oudine of a cho- 

reography, unlike the others, which contain talismans and a list of deities. According 
to the formulary for the document of transmission, the recipient was ill as a result of 
demon possession. 

The Register of the Twenty-eight Stellar Mansions is, as usual, divided into four 
parts, one part for the constellations of each of the four directions. The Register of the 
Seal ofYue is placed under the command of the generals of the Three Officials, and is 
also largely exorcistic in nature. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bing ling 

3.B.l.d Miscellanea 

Sandong xiudao yi H ifs] tff if! 

11 fols. 

By Sun Yizhong hao Baoguang zi 1003 

1237 (fasc. 989) 

“Protocol for the Practice of the Tao of the Three Caverns.” This is a remarkable 
litde handbook on the liturgical organization of Taoism after the troubled period of 
the Five Dynasties (907-960). The author writes in his preface that he obtained the 
information contained in this handbook from Liu Ruozhuo hao Huagai 

xiansheng ^ ii (t E. , a daoshi from the Beimang diocese in Sichuan. Liu has a 

biography in the LZTT 47.12a; it states that Liu served as Taoist registrar (zuojie daolu 




figure 42. Exorcist with a sword and a bowl of charm 
water (1217 2a-b). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the 
Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1200) 



[ 974 } 3.B. 1 Zhengyi 



3.B.2 Sanhuang [ 97s ] 



ifcfljiltit) in the capital during the Kaibao era (968-975) and that he collaborated in 
the reestablishement of the Taoist examination system. 

Sun worked as an official in Jingzhou (Hunan). He met Liu Ruozhuo and 
received his teachings when the latter traveled through the region in 1003 (year guimao 

IJP ). Sun wrote this work the same year. 

The introduction gives a summary of the development of liturgical Taoism until 
Sun’s times. The description he gives of the liturgical organization is much the same as 
that of the Tang (618-907) period (see the introduction to part 2.B.1). In addition to 
the traditional ordination grid, we find a superior group of hermits ( shanju daoshi |JL| 
® iMi) as well as the first mention of an exorcistic order that practiced the Thunder 
magic (leifa ff'ii) of the Emperor of the North (Beidi leigong fa 9a). 

Also remarkable are the separate ordination grades for women, at all levels, except for 
the Beidi exorcistic order. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bing ling 

Cuishan lu ^ H Mk 

2 juan 

Ming (1368-1644) 

983 (fasc. 617) 

“Anthology of Good [Deeds].” This is a collection of written memorials for Retreats 
and Offerings. The texts here are the Intentions (yi Ms ) specially written by prominent 
persons for inclusion into the written prayers presented in such rituals. Among the 
rituals we find those that celebrate the emperor’s birthday, that give thanks for rain 
(1.1a) and for the integrity of the territory of the Song empire (1.6b), and many others. 
Many Intentions come from Hangzhou in the Southern Song period (1127-1279) and 
refer to Taoist sanctuaries there. A series of memorials (2.2b-4b) presented at the death 
of the Thirty-seventh Heavenly Master, Zhang Yudi hao Xiwei zi 

should date from 1294 (see 1463 Han Tianshi shijia 3.12b). The patriarch was called to 
the capital in that year and died there suddenly. The memorials were presented (and 
perhaps written) by his mother, who recalls the conditions of his travels to the capital 
and laments that they would never meet again. Many other Heavenly Masters are 
mentioned, as well as various dignitaries of the Song. This collection must have been 
compiled at the Longhu shan ||j^[!| headquarters of the Zhengyi IE — Heavenly 
Master order on the basis of documents preserved there. It is therefore an important 
source for the history of the Heavenly Masters. None of the documents seem to date 
from the Ming, but the nature of some of the texts that date from the Song period and 
are highly nationalistic in tone or that date to the Yuan (1279-1368) and contain, like 
those mentioned above, barely hidden criticisms of the Mongol government make it 
unlikely that it was compiled under the Yuan. 



Daomen shigui 11 H + M 

20 fols. 

By Zhang Yuchu 55 ; 1406 

1232 (fasc. 988) 

‘Ten Rules for the Taoist.” This work was compiled by the forty-third Zhengyi 
patriarch. Zhang Yuchu had received the imperial order to revise the books of Taoism 
and responded by writing a dedication to the emperor that set out the foundations 
of Taoism, as well as its subsequent development, successive schools, and filiations. 
The author combines these presentations with his rules of demeanor for professional 
practice, which the Taoist priest (daoshi) should observe. This work signals the begin- 
ning of the editorial efforts that culminated in the production of the Da Ming Daozang 
jing ft Ejfij H »8c IS, decades after die death of Zhang Yuchu in 1410. 

Zhang Yuchu reveals his perception of the history of Taoism, dividing the his- 
toric schools and filiations into two groups: the “teachings” of Quanzhen 4 k and 
Zhengyi IE— are contrasted with the “methods” of, for example, the Qingwei MM 
Taoists. Zhang Yuchu explains the “interior” and “exterior” aspects of Taoism— that 
is, self-cultivation and liturgy, which serve the individual practitioner and the com- 
munity, respectively. Self-cultivation and liturgy complement each other. The rules 
also deal with the proper operation of cloisters: with the administration of their staff 
and economic facilities. Zhang Yuchu emphasizes that the teachings of Laozi and his 
inauguration of Taoism were the basis for the above teachings and methods. 

Florian C. Reiter 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Reiter, Grundelemente, 22 - 35 . 



3.B.2 Sanhuang 

Sanhuang (Dongshen P#) texts were already predominantly concerned with 
divination and prophylactic rites in medieval times; the few markedly Sanhuang texts 
of this later period continue this tradition. The Wuyue zhenxing tu H iH lM E4 HI is, 
together with the Sanhuang wen 4 E jl , the fundamental document of the Dongshen 
division. It is found here in 8y6 Sanhuang neiwen yibi in a late rendition that became 
popular in modern China and that was frequently reproduced on exorcistic objects 
such as door screens, entrance stones, talismans, and so on. The two texts related to 
the white monkey ( boyuan 0 $§) concern popular magic and divination. 



Tuan Bingling 




[ 976 ] 3 .B .2 Sanhuang 



3 .B .2 Sanhuang [ 977 ] 



Taishang dongshen sanyuan miaoben fushou zhenjing 

9 fols. 

Edited by Miao Shanshi f¥j H R , zi Taisu A M , hew Shian "If ; 1324 

651 (fasc. 343) 

“Real Scripture of Blessings and Longevity, Revealing the Marvelous Root of the 
Three Principles, from the Dongshen Canon.” In his colophon (dated 1324), the editor 
of the present version, the famous Taoist scholar and Quanzhen ^ Jl master Miao 
Shanshi, relates that he obtained this ancient scripture, corrected it, and divided it in 
(six) paragraphs ( zhang ijl ), whereupon a laymen by the name of Wang (Wang jushi 
T./it i, hew Zhongan had it printed and distributed. 

The claim that this was an “old scripture” carries some weight because the text 
shows clearly that before its division into paragraphs, this was a liturgical scripture in 
the classical form. Spoken by the Dasheng zu xuanyuan daode tianzun A 35 IR A 7 C 
jM tH ^ It , a title that makes us think of the Tang canonization of Laozi, this scripture 
was placed in the Dongshen section of the canon, probably by the Ming editors. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taiqing jinque yuhua xianshu baji shenzhang sanhuang neibi wen 

3 juan 

85s (fasc. 575) 

“Inner Secret Writs of the Three Sovereigns, [Constituting] the Divine Chapters of 
the Eight Poles of the Lustrous Writings of Immortality of the Gold Portal ofTaiqing.” 
The book is a compilation of the methods of the Sanhuang tradition. It is not likely to 
be earlier than the Southern Song dynasty (1127-1279); note, for instance, the legend 
of Zhenwu (1.7a), the reference to the Four Saints (sisheng 015 ; 1.5b), and the 
designation of the altar as Zhengyi tianhuang tan IE — JtJfS (1.26b), reflecting the 
supremacy of the Zhengyi organization. 

Each juan of the book pertains to one of the Three Sovereigns, referring each 
sovereign to one of the three cosmic levels of Heaven, Earth, and Humanity. Juan 
1 describes the different sections of the Taoist pantheon, as well as some methods 
of summoning the celestial spirits for exorcistic purposes. The fourth paragraph 
(i.ua-25b) constitutes a complete demonology, comprising seventy-two categories 
of “selfish spirits” or “spiritual outlaws” (sishen JAW ) that may nevertheless be made 
subservient. Juan 2 deals with methods of living in the mountains ( jushan zhifa 
[i| ^j£). It describes, for instance, the method of “inviting [the support of] the god 
of the mountain by means of offerings” {jiaoqing shanzhu If, Iff [J_| ± ; 2.4a-b), and it 
contains comprehensive fists to be used for the identification of herbs and minerals 



(2.7a-iob). Juan 3 deals with methods of avoiding danger and cultivating immortal- 
ity, such as the method of the five simulations (wujia fa £([§?£; 3-7b-8a, nb-i3a), 
by means of which one may obtain invisibility to evil influences (see 864 Tuanyang zi 
wujia lun). 

Poul Andersen 

Sanhuang neiwen yibi H ll ft SC. 3t 

14 fols. 

856 (fasc. 575) 

“Transmitted Secrets of the Inner Writs of the Three Sovereigns.” The book is not 
earlier than the Southern Song dynasty (1127-1279), since die Zhengyi yuantan IE 
— TCfg of Longhu shan is mentioned (9b). There is a postface fsjf to the 

book (though it precedes the text) signed by a Ziwei daoren ^ ' 0 . jji A and dated to a 
bingwu year. Fukui Kojun suggests that the year in question may be 1306 (Dokyo 
no kisoteki kenkyu , 190). 

The book contains incantations— referred to as inner writs ( neiwen fti) — of 
each of the Three Sovereigns, comprising 315, 264, and 216 characters, respectively. 
Those who study this Way (and who are initiated) should wear these neiwen on their 
body (5b). The book also contains three seals, mainly for protection when entering 
mountains (jb-7a). The work 118s Baopu zi neipian i7.i9b-2ob is quoted for the stories 
related to the first two of these seals: Huangshen ft 1 $ and Tuezhang MM (9b-ioa). 
The book concludes with a version of the fu representing the true forms of the Five 
Peaks (Wuyue zhenxing tu 2 lR [fil ; na-i3b). 

Poul Andersen 

Taishang tongxuan lingyin jing A Jl M Efl If 

11 fols. 

859 (fasc. 576) 

“Book of Efficacious Seals for Penetrating Mystery.” This text deals with several seals, 
of which the most important— that for “communicating with the powers” ( tongling Jl 
HI) — probably constitutes the basis of the book’s tide. Without this seal, says Laozi, 
“no technique of the Tao can succeed.” The present text, therefore, describes how 
to make, transmit, and use this seal, to which it also gives the names Lingbao seal 
and “fu-seal of the Eight Archivists (bashi A it ) for communicating with the spirits.” 
These Eight Archivists are genies in the service of the owner of the seal. 

The text says that an Offering to these Eight Archivists was composed at their be- 
hest in 155 by the Master of the Spirits ( shenshi ; i.e., Zhang Daoling ?). 

The method was later transmitted to Master Zhuge f§ M [Liang?] in 347, but “since 
then very few people have received it” (6b-7a). 



1 



3 .B .2 Sanhuang [ 979 ] 



[ 978 ] 3 .B .2 Sanhuang 

The same Master Zhuge explains how to “communicate with the powers and put 
demons to work.” If one wishes, for example, to order the demons to rob a person, 
one must “first sacrifice to them.” Using the “fu for summoning demons,” an adept 
could oblige the “demon soldiers” to go forth and take revenge on an enemy. Or an 
adept could change red beans into soldiers by pronouncing a formula over them after 
first wiping them with a mixture of sheep’s blood, cow’s bile, and mud. 

Texts such as this clearly derive from an archaic stratum of Taoism. The Xuandong 
tongling fu for example, are mentioned together with the Sanhuang 

wen “U in 671 Taishang wuji dadao ziran zhenyi wucheng fu shang jing 2.11b, an 
early Lingbao scripture of about 400 a.d. It may also be noted that here (3a), as in 
767 Taishang tongling bashi shengwen zhenxing tu 13a, Laozi is called the Master of Old 
(. xianshi Blfj ). 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang dongshen xuanmiao boyuan zhenjing 

19 fols. 

858 (fasc. 576) 

“Veritable Scripture of the White Monkey.” This scripture is said to have been 
revealed by a white monkey. An account of its transmission is found in 861 Taishang 
liuren mingjian fuyin jing i.ia-b. The latter text and the present one derive from the 
same source, which itself underwent major modifications (see 13b in the present work 
and the article on 861 Fuyin jing). 

This text comprises in all five diagrams (shi jt), which differ from those found in 
861 Fuyin jing. The performance of the rituals attached to each diagram is regulated by 
instructions concerning the diagram of Primordial Chaos. The most important place 
is assigned to a ritual accompanying the concoction and absorption of alchemical 
substances (second diagram, 3b-iob). 

The problem of dating this work is analogous to that concerning 861 Fuyin jing. The 
latter’s tentative Northern Song (960—1127) date is based on indications in its juan 4, 
which does not derive from the revelation of the white monkey (see the article on 861 
Fuyin jing). With respect to the present work, such a date can be regarded only as a 
terminus post quem. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Taishang liuren mingjian fuyin jing ± A T: UJJ $ 5 s If 

4 juan 

861 (fasc. 577) 

“Book of the Most High Luminous Mirror of the Six Ren Tallying with Yin.” 
The tide of this work bears little relation to its contents. The reference to the mantic 



method of the six ren 7 \ 3 r is out of place here, even though instances of this method 
are described in 3.9b-i5b. The tide “Writ of the Monkey” ( Tuanshu JHU) is more apt 
(see 3.28a, indicating a work in four juan, and 1.1b, three juan). 

The latter appellation confirms the account of the book’s transmission at the head 
of the first juan. The author affirms that the work was transmitted, without title and in 
fragmentary form, by a white monkey to the preimperial strategist Sun Bin MM ■ The 
present edition was copied from an earlier version (3.25b, 4.16b). Another fragment of 
the original is represented by 8s8 Taishang dongshen xuanmiao boyuan zhenjing. 

Of uncertain date, this work may have been composed under the Northern Song 
(960-1127). Most of the methods described in juan 4, especially the “concealed return 
of the Jade Maiden” (4.2a), correspond to the versions given in Dunjia juying jing, 
compiled between 1034-1038 (cf. the article on s87 Huangdi taiyi bamen rushi bijue). 

The first three juan form a coherent set of small nocturnal rites constructed around 
a series of symbolic diagrams in increasing order of complexity. The instructions given 
for the first one, the Diagram of Primordial Chaos ( hunyuan shi jfi jnit; 1.1b), apply 
to the others as well. A sketch of the altar area is included in 3.29a-b. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Taishang chiwen dongshen sanlu fi _ k iP? W H flc 

24 fols. 

Attributed to Tao Hongjing (456-536); Song (960-1279)? 

589 (fasc. 324) 

“Three Dongshen Registers of Red Writs of the Most High.” The term chiwen ffc 
'jC is explained in the preface, on the basis of a quotation from Tao Hongjing, as 
the original term for “register” (lu H ; ia). 

The compilation of the book is attributed to Tao Hongjing and the preface 
(ia-b) to Li Chunfeng (602-670). The preface describes the content of the 

book as “formulas [for the registers] of the Dongshen canon [dongshen shi 
and states that these formulas were transmitted in three volumes, separate from the 
main corpus of Dongshen texts, and included in the section of untitled works in the 
version transmitted by Ge Hong and Bao Jing (see 640 Dongshen badi miaojing 
jing). The undated manuscript from which the present book was copied is said by the 
preface writer to have been executed in the calligraphy of the Qi and Liang dynasties 
(fifth and sixth centuries). It is claimed to have been transmitted to a daoshi of old, 
Zhang Qiao jjj| ^ , who used it to great effect. The date of the preface itself is Zhen- 
guan j=| fgi 6 (632), but the added cyclical characters renzi do not correspond to 
this year. 

To all appearances the preface is a forgery. The assertion of an early transmission 
of the book during the Six Dynasties (220-589) clearly is unfounded. The contents 



[ 98o ] 3.B.2 Sanhuang 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 981 ] 



suggest, rather, that it belongs to the Song dynasty. More specifically, the mention 
of the Black Killer (Heisha ® $x; 13a) suggests a date later than the 930s, when this 
deity came to the fore with the foundation of the Tianxin zhengfa A A IE A (see 128s 
Tisheng baode zhuan). The use of hand mudras ( qiayin fgffl) and of pseudo-Sanskrit 
words (i4b-i5a) point in the same direction. 

The preface is followed by an introduction to the book (ib-2b). It places die totality 
of the work in the context of systems of divination based on direct communication 
with the spirits, referring to the “inner writ of the Book of Changes” ( Zhouyi neiwen 
and to the “decisive speech of the Three Jia spirits” (sanjia chutcm EL ^ 
IMM), while stating that these systems represent the most exalted part of die Book 
of Three Registers ( Sanlu pian .nlKM; ib). The Zhouyi neiwen corresponds to the 
method described in the first of the registers contained in the book “Bagua nei ji- 
xiong yinglu ej [XJ1SI1” (3a-8a), which relies on fii representing the spirits 

of the Eight Trigrams. The expression sanjia chutan apparently refers to the method 
of the third register (“Taishang xuanmiao qianjin lu i6b-24b), in 

which the fu of the Three Jia spirits play a prominent part. Both methods center on 
the summoning of spirits by means of fu and serve mainly for predicting the future. 
Both methods also include offerings (ji 3b) to the spirits. These methods may be 
compared to the similar but more complex method described in an earlier text of the 
Dongshen tradition, 1202 Dongshen badi yuanbian jing. 

The second register, “Taishang xuanmiao tongshen lu^Ag^jii^ll” (8b-i6b), 
describes a number of minor methods for protection, such as die method of five 
simulations ( wujiafa it f S ; ioa-ua), by which die adept may identify his body 
with one of the Five Elements in order to obtain invisibility or protection from the 
dangers associated with the element in question. This register also contains a series 
of methods connected with agricultural work for sowing crops, praying for rain, etc. 
(nb-ub). 

Poul Andersen 

Taishang dongshen wuxing zhusu riyue hunchang jing 

7 fols. 

657 (fasc. 343) 

“Book of the Five Stars, Sundry Mansions, and the Sun and the Moon.” Incorpo- 
rated in the Dongshen canon, this small popular book on the planets, the mansions, 
and the sun and the moon that mix with the everyday world ( hunchang iM ^ ) tells 
us about the moments and the ways of incarnation of these stellar powers on Earth. 
Those who are able, thanks to this book, to recognize these powers and meet them will 
gready benefit. Many great men of the past, the latest mentioned being Li Chunfeng 



(602-670), owed their power to their knowledge of the whereabouts of the 

stars. 

Kristofer Schipper 



3.B.3 Lingbao 

In the period of transition during the Five Dynasties (907-960), many new forms 
of ritual were created. Next to the Lingbao Iflf services for the salvation of die 
deceased, we see the appearance of solemn Offering (Jiao H ) rituals for the benefit 
of the living. These Offerings centered on the worship of star deities. They were 
called Great Offerings to the Entire Firmament (luotian da jiao ip. A A fit ) and were 
performed within the context of state ritual (see also part 3.B.1). Already present in 
the kingdom of Shu, where Du Guangting performed them for the rulers of the 
Former Shu (907-925) kingdom (see Verellen, “Liturgy and sovereignty” 70), these 
rituals were also adopted by the Song (960-1279) emperors. The eminent statesman 
Wang Qinruo was commissioned to present an official version of the Luotian jian 
(see 1224 Daomen dingzhi 3, by Lii Yuansu Over time, smaller jiao rituals 

of a more specialized nature, presented to the stars and cosmic forces responsible for 
phenomena such as fires or epidemics, also appeared. 

The most important form of liturgy, however, remained that for the salvation of 
the dead. The already quite extensive rituals were now enlarged with meditation prac- 
tices and rites for the “salvation through sublimation” ( liandu of the souls of 

the deceased. Liandu rites were adaptations from a great number of different sources, 
such as Shangqing meditation techniques. Inner Alchemy, Tantric Buddhist methods, 
and shamanistic practices. These new rites blended into the ancient Lingbao liturgy to 
form the “Great Shangqing Lingbao Rites” (Shangqing lingbao dafa h '/ft 'M If j\ fife ) 
of the Southern Song (1127-1279). 

For the study of this eclectic form of Taoist ritual, the great manuals are the most 
complete and informative material we have, whereas the individual scriptures and 
litanies do not yield much new material. The hymnbooks that appear here, some of 
which were authored by emperors of the Song and Ming (1368-1644) dynasties, form 
a special group of texts. 

In keeping with the arrangement of corresponding parts in this work, we first list 
the scriptures, then the litanies, and finally the liturgical manuals and hymns. The 
reader is, however, advised to first consult the great manuals for a general overview of 
what had become a complex and highly elaborate form of solemn ritual. 



[ 982 ] 3 .B .3 Lingbao 



3 .B .3 Lingbao [ 983 ] 



At the same time, this section features a large number of rites that were meant to be 
performed on a more modest scale, and even as an individual practice. For instance, 
the liandu rites presented, explained, and commentated by Zheng Sixiao ftPS in 
$48 Taiji jilian neifa could be performed by a single adept, as well as in the framework 
of a large service. Other rites, for which we have scriptures as well as rituals, concern 
personal or family welfare and are linked to anniversaries and funerals. 

The jinlu zhai if MM (484-494,495-497) andyulu zhai (49 9S04) appear to 

have been performed at the Ming court. 

3.B.3.a Scriptures 

Taishang xuhuang tianzun sishijiu zhang jing + 

14 fols. 

18 (fasc. 25) 

“Scripture of the Most High Heavenly Worthy of Vacuity in Forty-nine Sections.” 
This text should be seen, according to its title, in the context of the rites for the salva- 
tion of the soul. The forty-nine paragraphs of the text evoke the forty-nine days of 
mourning, as well as the forty-nine letters of jade (yuzha TI-fL) used in the Lingbao 
dafa S to release the deceased’s soul from the hells (see, for example, 1223 

Shcmgqing lingbao dafa 6.1a). If Xuhuang tianzun /g seems identical, in our 

text, to Yuanshi tianzun 71 # the rcvcaler of the Durenjing (cf. Cheng Xuan- 
ying’s commentary, 87 Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing sizhu 1.2b), he is also, 
during the Song period, a divinity who received the Lingbao dafa from the Tianzhen 
huangren A: til Af A (see 147 Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing futu 2.3a). The 
ritual tradition to which Jin Yunzhong claims to belong is called “Xuhuang’s teach- 
ing” (1223 Lingbao dafa 16. ia). We also find Song (960-1279) references to “Xuhuang’s 
marvelous way” (1219 Gaoshang shenxiao yuqing zhenwang zishu dafa 12.1b) and to 
“Xuhuang’s spirit altar” ($66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa, preface, 2a). Xu Xuan already 
mentions a “Xuhuang’s terrace,” which seems to be a permanent altar relating to the 
Sanqing guan Hfif H in die district of Qingjiang '/#'/! in Jiangxi province (. Xugong 
wenji 20). 

The text consists essentially in moral maxims pronounced by the Tianzun. These 
maxims are sometimes given in response to the questions of a certain Miaoxing zhen- 
ren t&fjM X- Human beings must turn away from all that embroils them in this 
world— money, prestige, pleasure— before it is too late. 



Yuanshi tianzun jidu xuehu zhenjing ft $3 @ if^ Jj| iflL <W] 05 £?. 

3 juan 

72 (fasc. 32) 

“True Scripture for Salvation from the Lake of Blood, [Revealed] by Yuanshi 
Tianzun.” This text describes the creation and the unfolding of a ritual in Heaven for 
the salvation of the souls of women who have died in childbirth. The ritual includes 
the singing of the name of Jiuku tianzun fkfjfzW (who made the vow to save all 
souls from die hell named Lake of Blood), the promulgation of a writ of pardon, the 
destruction of the hell, an ablution, a sermon, and the pudu If ft (Universal Salvation 
ritual). At die end of die book, Yuanshi tianzun states tiiat die ritual is to 

be revealed on Earth. 

Several elements make it possible to situate this text in the school of the Great 
Lingbao Method ( Lingbao dafa Hit? ;A t£): references to that method (1.2b, 3.2a); 
reference to the “grand circulation of Brahman energies” (daxingfanqi ;A;fj 5 £ 5 U, 1.3a; 
cf. 4-66 Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu 116.2b); mention ofYuanhuang 7A jH (2.3a; cf. 466 
Jidujinshu 115.7a); and so on. The “secret language of Brahman qi” (fanqiyinyu ft if, 
I® 1.51-b) first appears in the Durenjing /§ A!?, in the latter half of the thirteenth 
century (e.g., 91 Taishang dongxuan lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing zhujie 
3.22b-23a). 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang shuo jiuyou bazui xinyin miaojing f Jl lft fit -L' EP 0 If 

2 fols. 

74 (fasc. 32) 

“Marvelous Heart-Seal Scripture in which Taishang Explains the Nine Hells and 
Release from Sin.” Taishang is here identified with Yuanshi tianzun; he explains to 
the Jiuku zhenren that people “drown in the Sea of Suffering” because of their evil 
thoughts, for “all comes from the heart.” In order “not to give rise to the ‘heart of this 
world,”’ one need only recite the present text and thereby save one’s ancestors from 
hell. 

The recitation of this text is required in the context of a huanglu zhai Re- 

treat, according to 1224 Daomen dingzhi 5.8a: it is the recitation to be used at the “sixth 
hour,” the hour of the hungry souls (cf. 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu 308.20a and 219 
Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa 71.8b, both of which mention the recitation of 
a Jiuyou bazui miaojing 



John Lagerwey 



John Lagerwey 




[ 9%4 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 98 s ] 



Yuanshi tianzun shuo ganlu shengtian shenzhou miaojing 

3 fols. 

75 (fasc. 32) 

“Marvelous Scripture of the Divine Formulas for Sweet Dew and Ascension to 
Heaven, Preached by Yuanshi Tianzun.” At the request of Prince Moonlight (Yue- 
guang tongzi U )fe!l ip), the Tianzun reveals how to save the unfortunate dead: 
one must first take a handful of dirt from the place where the person died and place 
it in a clean container. One then spreads a feast-offering for the soul of the dead per- 
son and pronounces two formulas, one to give the soul sweet dew and the other to 
enable it to ascend to heaven. These two formulas may be found in the text of the 
Universal Salvation ritual (pudu Hg) given by Jiang Shuyu ( so 8 Wushang hucm- 
glu dazhai licheng yi 3o.8b-9b), and Jin Yunzhong (1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 
38 . 28 b- 29 a). 

The recitation of this text, mentioned in the Bishu sheng xubiandao siku queshu mu 
catalogue (VDL 14), is required in 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa 71.8b. 
The question of a possible relationship to the Buddhist apocrypha regarding Prince 
Moonlight remains to be studied. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ziircher, “Eschatology and messianism”; Ziircher, “‘Prince Moonlight.” 

John Lagerwey 

Yuanshi shuo gongde fashi wangsheng jing jc JT IS 

3 fols. 

76 (fasc. 32) 

“Scripture on the Merit of Effecting Rebirth by Ritual Distribution of Food, 
Spoken by [the Heavenly Worthy of] Primordial Beginning.” This text propagates 
the importance of donating food for the souls of the deceased, enabling them to leave 
hell. 

The Zhenren of Great Compassion and Great Wisdom (Daci dahui zhenren 
^liA) asks by what means the souls suffering in hell can be saved. The Heavenly 
Worthy of the Primordial Beginning replies in form of gdthds, saying that the dead 
who are ritually nourished will be reborn in Heaven, and emphasizing the merits of 
such a distribution of food. 

The gathas of our text are found in S 47 Lingbao yujian, both as invocations with 
associated magic characters and secret formulas in pseudo-Sanskrit (36.8a, 36.ioa-b 
[modified]), and in the context of the rite for the transformation of ritual food ( bian - 
hua fashi W'itlf'k', 17a). 



The present scripture is also part of today’s Universal Salvation ritual ( pudu HJ®) 
in Taiwan (cf. Schipper, “Taiwan zhi daojiao wenxian,” 178). 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Taishang yuhua dongzhang bawang dushi shengxian miaojing 

12 fols. 

Postface dated 1143 

77 (fasc. 32) 

“Marvelous Scripture of the Cavern-Stanzas of the Jade Flower of the Most High 
for Saving Souls from Hell, Saving the World, and Ascension to Heaven.” The text 
is composed of nine stanzas. The term Yuhua i£lp (Jade Flower) appears in the text 
(10b), but its meaning is not explicit. The text contains many allusions to alchemical 
practice, and this term is probably also to be understood in that context. 

A postface to the book recounts its origin in the following manner: a herdsboy 
from Xiaoyi (Fenyang, Shanxi) by the name of Du Changchun tt encoun- 

ters an immortal and is “suddenly enlightened” ( dunwu iffifO). He begins to talk of 
abstruse matters, to produce inspired poetry, and to heal people with fu writings and 
charm-water. As his renown spreads, the monks of Wanshou gong MWtH in Tianning 
f (Fenzhou) decide to invite him to “carry out transformations” ( xinghua frffc) 
in a sanctuary (an M) built especially for him behind their monastery. Their aim is to 
earn enough money to be able to repair the monastery, severely damaged by the wars 
at the end of the Northern Song. The monks invite him to a first jiao H -Offering (in 
which more than a thousand persons participate) on the day of the Superior Principle 
in 1143. It is at this time that Du proposes to transmit to them “a perfect text of the 
Most High, in one juan, that does not yet circulate in the world.” It requires two fur- 
ther jiao, in the second and third months, to complete the transmission of the present 
text. 

The scripture begins in the Heaven of Jade Purity on the Xuandu Mountain, where 
Yuanshi tianzun, having ascended his throne, “causes the gongs to resound” in order 
to summon all the spirits of the universe to an “assembly of the Law.” The zhenren 
Tongxuan takes advantage of the occasion to ask what to do so that the people “in the 
inferior world” stop sinning and return to the Orthodox Way: “It is difficult to fol- 
low the [way of] human heaven, easy to go down the path of demons. Not seeing the 
light, men fall into the yin fortress [hell].” Even those who, in fear of death, practice 
the techniques of longevity end nonetheless in the Bureau of Earth. What should be 
done? 

Yuanshi tianzun explains to Tongxuan that all the problems occur because people 
do not obey the Ten Commandments. “It is not the hells that [visit punishment] 



[ y 86 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 987 ] 



on people; people bring punishment on themselves.” The Tianzun then describes a 
“golden book of the Jade Gate, hidden in the upper library of Xuandu,” whose recita- 
tion will save people from all the ills of the three spheres of the universe. 

John Lagerwey 

Lingbao tianzun shuo luku shousheng jing M I? A H Wi 0 ■§ 4 $5 

5 fols. 

Twelfth or thirteenth century 

333 (fasc. 167) 

“Scripture of the Treasury of Reimbursements for the Gift of Life.” This scripture 
has been translated and studied by Hou Ching-lang, who dates it to the twelfth or 
thirteenth century ( Monnaies d’ojfrandes , 35-36). It begins with an assembly in the 
Land of Clarity (Jingming ), at which the zhenren Guangmiaoyin asks 

the Lingbao tianzun II ff AH why people’s fortunes differ. The Tianzun responds 
that everyone depends for his or her life on a celestial bureau, and on a terrestrial 
court for his or her body. The debts thus contracted with respect to Heaven and Earth 
can be calculated precisely in accordance with the year of one’s birth— a table is pro- 
vided— and these sums must be reimbursed. Failure to do so, or failure to recite the 
present text while reimbursing the treasury, means the deceased must pay their debts 
by suffering first in hell and then in the next life. The Tianzun also provides a list of 
the names of the officers to whom the money should be sent during rituals addressed 
to the Three Treasures. 

In conclusion, the zhenren takes it upon himself to “spread this teaching in order 
to save the living and the dead.” 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Hou Ching-lang, Monnaies d’ojfrandes. 

John Lagerwey 

Taisbang laojun shuo wudou jinzhang shousheng jing 

8 fols. 

653 (fasc. 343) 

“Book of the Golden Emblems of the Five Bushels Conferring Life, Spoken by the 
Most High Laojun.” This small liturgical scripture is still recited today for the rites 
of replenishing the Heavenly Treasury ( tianku MM) for the living. It probably dates 
from the Song dynasty (see Hou Ching-lang, Monnaies d’offrandes, 41). 

The first part of the text explains the relationship between the date of birth and one 
of the Five Bushel constellations. Five talismans, here called zhang $ (emblems), are 
revealed to heal diseases related to the Five Viscera and, hence, the Five Bushels. 



The second part of the text introduces the relationship between a person’s Funda- 
mental Destiny and the sum of money (benming yinqian MM 'MM. or kucai /ijl 14 ) to 
be refunded to the Heavenly Treasury. The rate of reimbursement for each Destiny is 
indicated (6b-7a). Hou Ching-lang has translated and studied the present text. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Hou Ching-lang, Monnaies d’ojfrancies , 40-49. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao zhuanshen duming jing 

10 fols. 

340 (fasc. 176) 

“Scripture of Salvation and Translation of the Soul.” In this text, the Most High 
Lord of the Way explains to the True Person of the South Pole Who Saves Lives (Nanji 
duming zhenren j^j H @ np R A ) how to save a dying person : one must invite a Taoist 
to recite a confession for the person and transmit to him or her the commandments. 
Money must also be given for the production of religious images and the copying of 
sacred books. When the dying person shall have received the commandments, “his 
spirit will be translated into the Mystery” ( zhuanshen rumiao f ? 4 A ( 4 ) and he or she 
will be reborn in the Land of Purity and Peace. 

This introduction is followed by a confession addressed to each of the ten direc- 
tional Jiuku tianzun AH in turn. Following this confession, the Most High 
completes his explanations concerning the function of the ritual: the Taoist should 
continue recitations for 100 days after the person’s death. A Taoist should also stand 
and burn incense to the left of the path along which the coffin is carried for burial. 
Then the Taoist should do the same beside the tomb so that the god of the soil may 
welcome kindly the soul of the deceased person. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao shishi duren miaojing 

11 fols. 

341 (fasc. 176) 

“Ten Masters who Save the People.” The title refers to ten rules of behavior laid 
down by Lingbao tianzun SHAH after he had witnessed the tragic results of 
human sin. The story that precedes the promulgation of these rules is complicated: 
in a land some 600,000 li M to the west of Kunlun there reigns a king who, having 
been converted to the Great Way by his wife, gives to a zhenren by the name of Gaishi 
HtS the title Master of the Land (guoshi HM). Gaishi explains the nature of good 



t 




[ 988 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 

government to the vassals of the king (he recommends a mixture of Confucian ethics 
and Legalist administrative principles). Once they have returned to their respective 
lands, these vassals dispatch tribute to the king in sufficient quantity to enable him to 
celebrate a seven-day Retreat, during which the scriptures of the Greater Vehicle are 
to be explained. 

At this juncture the Tianzun himself appears: having taken on the form of the Mas- 
ter of the Land, he descends into the sanctuary. The king, the queen, and the vassals 
are gready confused, but Lingbao tianzun soon establishes his identity by performing 
a series of miracles inspired by the opening text of i Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin 
miaojing. Once he has, in this manner, gathered around him all the spirits of Heaven 
and hell, he recites the scriptures of the Greater Vehicle and then creates a “pure pool” 
in which his audience bathes. After having then defined the Great Way for these puri- 
fied beings— it is neither life nor death, neither empty nor full— he surfeits them with 
seven days of explanation of “the essence of the Law” ( fayao ): this is “the first 

ritual of the Grand Distribution” (diyi dashi fashi q) — another name for 
xhepudu HflJ. 

This text, in other words, is designed both to serve as an ideological guide to 
church-state relations, and to identify a specific form of xhepudu ritual as the ultimate 
expression of the worship of the Great Way. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao taixuan puci quanshi jing 

II fols. 

342 (fasc. 176) 

“Scripture of the Exhortations of Puci.” Puci H , or Universal Compassion, is the 
name of a zhenren who, while in “the world of the various recompenses,” asks Jiuku 
tianzun about the origin of human suffering and how to avoid it. The 

Tianzun responds point by point and each time enjoins Puci to transmit the answer 
to Earth in the form of an “exhortation.” Each exhortation is linked to the description 
of an associated failing that leads to one of eighteen hells. 

The best way to escape these hells is the practice of deep meditation ( ruding A aE: )■ 
Lay people who haven’t the time for such meditation should “listen to the Greater 
Vehicle, be initiated in its commandments, and confess their faults.” To give money for 
preaching, for copying the scriptures, and for making religious images is also a source 
of great merit. One can also “pay” for the sins of the dead by having monks (fazhong 
) recite confessions for them. Whatever contributes to the propagation and the 
exegesis of die Law is meritorious. 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 989 ] 

The text contains (8b) a reference to 9 Taishang yicheng haikong zhizang jing 
1. 6a ff. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao jiuku miaojing A Jl i|s| A It Hf Ifc %P I? 

4 fols. 

374 (fasc. 181) 

“Scripture for Salvation from Distress.” This scripture was among those printed at 
imperial behest in 1017 (VDL 47). Its tide refers to the Heavenly Worthy Who Saves 
All Souls in Hell from Distress. The scripture, composed for the most part in five- 
character rhymed verse, was— and still is— recited during rituals for the salvadon of 
the souls of the deceased (see 1220 Daofa huiyuan 207.1a and 1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa 
55.28a). The work 399 Taishang dongxuan lingbao tianzun shuo jiuku miaojing zhujie is 
a commentated edition of this text. 

The present edidon contains a postface by Zhao Ziqiu dated 1124. Zhao 

recounts the transmission of the text from Officer Tian BUP] W, a master of the Ce- 
lestial Pivot Rites ( Tianshu fa AtfeA), to a Buddhist monk. The recitation of the text 
having been urged on the monk by his deceased mother during a mediumistic seance 
conducted by Tian, Tian transmitted the book to die monk and thus enabled him to 
save his mother from hell. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang jiuku tianzun shuo xiaoqian miezui jing 

3 fols. 

378 (fasc. 182) 

“The Tianzun Who Saves from Distress Explains how to Extirpate Guilt.” The 
Tianzun offers this explanation to an assembly of celestial dragons, Kings of Hells, 
and Directors of Destiny summoned to hear his sermon. The sequence of rituals he 
recommends and the names given the kings of the ten hells are essentially the same as 
those in 21s Difu shiwang badu yi. Once these rituals have been completed, die Tianzun 
orders that the merit obtained be assessed and that all “solitary souls” be released from 
hell. The scribes of die twenty-four hells of Fengdu direct these souls to the Smelting 
Pool, which they enter carrying “a powerful fu of the cinnabar world for transforming 
the body.” The passage through the pool enables them “to return to the banks of the 
Tao.” 

The fu is probably related to the Danyangju which first appears in the 

Southern Song (1127-1279; cf. S4S Taijijilian neifa). 

John Lagerwey 



I 




[ 990 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 991 ] 



Taishang shuo Fengdu baku yule miaojin g % ± I£ 1 J$ f|$ JJt il 

1 fol. 

379 (fasc. 182) 

“Scripture of the [Tianzun of the] Joy That Saves from the Distress of Fengdu, 
Preached by the Most High.” Dwelling in the Palace of the Far East— normally associ- 
ated with Jiuku tianzun in the upper regions of Fengdu— the Tianzun of 

the Joy That Saves from Distress radiates a light of five colors that reveals the innumer- 
able sufferings of the souls in hell. Moved by what he sees, the Tianzun preaches this 
“marvelous scripture that saves all the denizens of Fengdu” in order to “save all those 
poor souls who are guilty of sins.” 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang shuo shilian shengshen jiuhu ji ng X. _h T. 1$ Ifc Iff 

2 fols. 

636 (fasc. 341) 

‘The Most High Proffers the Scripture of Salvation and of the Birth of the Spir- 
its by the Ten Sublimations.” The use of the term lian M (sublimation) in the title 
and the reference to 318 Dongxuan lingbao ziran jiutian shengshen zhangjing , one of 
the basic texts of sublimation rites from the Southern Song (1127-1279) on, suggest 
that this brief scripture is an adaptation of these rites meant for popular use. In the 
scripture, the Most High Lord Lao assumes all forms and roams the universe in order 
to “promote the religion and save the living and the dead.” To that end he urges the 
“concentrated and sustained recitation” of the names of the Tianzun Who Save from 
Distress in the Ten Directions. Mention of this practice of reciting the name(s) of 
Jiuku tianzun may be found in the postface (dated 1124) of 374 Taishang 

dongxuan lingbao jiuku miaojing. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang lingbao tianzun shuo yanshou miaojing 

2 fols. 

382 (fasc. 182) 

“Marvelous Scripture on Longevity, Preached by the Most High Lingbao Tianzun.” 
The light that radiates from the body of Lingbao yanshou tianzun fi If 5 $ S X # as 
he preaches the present text on the Mountain of Golden Light in the far south attracts 
all the celestial dragons and demon kings of the universe. They implore the Tianzun 
to put an end to the cycle of rebirth. When the dragons and demons have returned to 
their places, five zhenren and four young lads— representing, perhaps, the Five Peaks 
and the Four Seas— begin to perform a ritual that ends with hymns to the name of 
the Tianzun. In response to this ritual, the Tianzun emits a light from the crown of his 



head. This light penetrates the hearts of this audience, but it does not bring spiritual 
awakening. 

A fifth lad asks the reason for this lack of enlightenment. They do not understand 
the True Tao, replies the Tianzun. To know the True Tao is to know that “all ap- 
pearances [faxiang are empty and vain.” If the people of the world wish to 

prolong their lives, they should, therefore, invite a Taoist to celebrate an “Offering 
and Retreat of Destiny” (Benming zhaijiao cf. the Booming zhai {Jfcn pjlf, 

a ritual also composed of a retreat and an offering, in 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu 
201-3). 

It may be noted further that the terms shenguang ^ ft and jinguang ft are char- 
acteristic of the Lingbao dafa school (e.g., 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa 
8.1a, 41.7b). 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao xiaorang huozai jing X _L fl^I M H iff X X 

3 fols. 

Song (960-1279) or later 

359 (fasc. 179) 

“Lingbao Scripture for Warding off Fires.” Judging from the celestial administra- 
tion that figures in this short scripture, it probably dates from the Song or later (cf. 
Song shi 103. 2513-15 on cults devoted to fire divinities from the eleventh century on). 

During a visit of inspection in the Ministry of Fire ( huobu i^CnP), Lingbao tianzun 
S SF X # bestows Chiling shenjun ft M ^ il , the highest divinity there, with a for- 
mula of invocation (zhou /£) and exhorts him to promulgate it in the world (2a, 5; read 
shi if for shi H ). Through this invocation, repentant sinners may obtain remission 
from their offenses and are spared the fires that are normally sent as a punishment by 
the celestial ministry. Moreover, the deities offer their protection should nonauthor- 
ized fire demons ( huojing X% i, huoguai X til) attempt to harm the house of these 
sinners. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao tianzun shuo luotian dajiao shangpin miaojing 

3 fols. 

1194 (fasc. 875) 

“Wondrous Superior Scripture of the Great Offering to the Entire Firmament, Set 
Forth by Lingbao Tianzun.” This short scripture to be recited for general protection 
is not likely to be earlier than the Southern Song. The text begins with the expression 
ershi JUS# (at that time) and continues with a list of deities similar to those used in 




[ pp 2 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



the invitation of standard rituals. This list does not correspond to the list of deities in 
any of the preserved rituals of the luotian dajiao If Jj B§ (cf. texts 4.77-4.79). 

Poul Andersen 

Taishan g lingbao tianzun shuo rangzai due jing 

2 fols. 

357 (fasc. 179) 

“Scripture for Averting Disaster and Escaping from Difficulty, Preached by Ling- 
bao Tianzun.” The Tianzun preaches this text to an assembly of the gods gathered in 
the Land of Chanli ijip j|c| i . In it he explains how lay people can avert any pending 
disaster by making confession before [a statue of] the Jade Emperor and reciting the 
present text. 

John Lagerwey 

3.B.3.b Litanies 

Taishang lingbao shangyuan tianguan xiaoqian miezui chan 

II fols. 

533 (fasc. 295) 

Taishang lingbao zhongyuan diguan xiaoqian miezui chan 

9 fols. 

534 (fasc. 295) 

Taishang lingbao xiayuan shuiguan xiaoqian miezui chan 

9 fols. 

535 (fasc. 295) 

“Litany of the Three Officials of the Three Principles for the Abolition of Faults 
and Remission of Sins, a Lingbao Scripture.” This modern liturgical canon, invoking 
120 Heavenly Worthies for each of the Three Principles, is currently recited on the 
occasion of jiao Si services. 

Kristofer Schipper 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 993 ] 



Taiyi jiuku tianzun shuo badu xuehu baochan 

15 fols. 

538 (fasc. 296) 

“Litany for Deliverance from the Lake of Blood, Preached by Taiyi Jiuku Tianzun.” 
After having listened to the True Person of Marvelous Transport (Miaoxing zhenren 
R A) describe the horrors of the Lake of Blood hell and of the kinds of sins and 
deaths that lead to it, the Heavenly Worthy Who Saves from Distress (Jiuku tianzun 
H ), promulgates several fu that illumine the hell in question and dry it up. The 
Tianzun then utters a number of wishes for the souls in the Lake of Blood: women 
who have died in childbirth, soldiers who have died in battle, people who have died 
of illnesses that disfigured them or caused them to give off a stench, and criminals. 
At last the Tianzun floods the lake with his own light, and all the souls thus liberated 
burn incense and recite the present litany “of homage to the Three Pure Ones and all 
the saints.” The litany that follows is indeed addressed first to the Three Pure Ones 
and then to the entire spiritual hierarchy. The latter’s middle ranks are occupied by a 
number of zhenren and Heavenly Masters, and its lower ranks by the officers in charge 
of the underworld. 

John Lagerwey 

Qingxuan jiuku baochan r & ^ fH 

11 fols. 

539 (fasc. 296) 

“Litany of the Savior from Distress.” This litany is addressed to the Father of Great 
Mercy ( daci dabei zhi fu the Great Monad who dwells in the blue 

heaven ( qingxuan Jlf % ) in the east. The litany is divided into nine sections, each of 
which supplicates the Great Monad to pardon the sins of “so-and-so, who has died,” 
and to “issue the fu orders that will save the soul of the deceased person” from the 
Nine Realms of Darkness. This prayer for pardon and salvation is followed by the ex- 
pression of homage to the nine aspects of the Great Monad (cf. the “nine times nine” 
bowings [bai ] mentioned on page ib). 

The mention of a “master of the Great Way of the Yellow Register” and of “writs 
of pardon” suggests a modern date for this text. 

John Lagerwey 

Cizun shengdu baochan @ IS. tic 

9 fols. 

540 (fasc. 296) 

“Litany of the Merciful Worthy for Ascension to Heaven.” This litany is to be re- 
cited in the context of a Yellow Register Retreat performed by “companions of the 







[ 994 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



Tao” on behalf of a deceased person. It is divided into three sections, each of which 
is composed of bows, confessions, and a Pacing the Void (buxu tPlM)- The bows are 
associated with expressions of homage to the Three Pure Ones, the Great Monad (the 
Merciful Worthy of the tide), the Tianzun Who Saves from the Nine Realms of Dark- 
ness, and the Jiuku tianzun of the Ten Directions. The three confessions 

are for the sins of the body, the heart, and the mouth ( sanye ). The end of the text 

states that the priest should go on to chant the Precious Tides” ( baohao jf ) of Jiuku 
tianzun and to recite his scripture. As in S 39 Qingxuan jiuku baochan, mention is made 
here of the issuance of indulgences called “golden writs” ( jinshu ). 

John Lagenvey 

Donjjyue dasheng baochan Jji JiL A 4 f? 

20 fols. 

541 (fasc. 296) 

“Litany of Abundant Life of the Eastern Peak.” This litany is addressed in the first 
place to the emperor of Abundant Life (dasheng ^ 4 .), who reigns over the Eastern 
Peak, and secondarily to the many subordinate divinities in his infernal administra- 
tion. That this is a Ming (1368-1644) text may be inferred from references to the 
“present dynasty” (4a) and to the guilt incurred by those who criticize Confucians 
or Buddhists (13a). The text contains three sequences of confessions: for the sins of 
the body, the heart, and the mouth. Each sequence is preceded by nine expressions of 
homage to the emperor of the Eastern Peak. The priests who recite this book for the 
faithful are called fazhong f ^ (8a). 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang yaotai yisuan baoji yannian chan )\. h 1$, S S In M 

10 fols. 

812 (fasc. 566) 

“Litany for Prolonging Life by Increasing the Years in the Precious Books of the 
Most High Jade Terrace.” The invocation of die names of 150 Tianzun creates the 
possibility of finding a receptive ear in the numberless palaces of the Milky Way. 
Prominence is given to the deities in that realm who have ultimate responsibility for 
requests for longevity: the High August of the Purple Department (Zifu gaohuang 
^ ® M ) and the Most Holy of the Pure Metropolis ( Qingdu zhisheng '/if U[$ M IS ; 
cf. S36 Taishang xuansi miezui zifu xiaozai fachan ib). 



Ursula- A ngelika Cedzich 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 99 s ] 



3.B.3.C Rituals 

Taichung chujia chuandu yi f . h ( U M ® hi 

14 fols. 

By Jia Shanxiang (A- 1061) 

1236 (fasc. 989) 

“Ordination Ceremony for Those Who Leave the Family.” This ceremony for dis- 
ciples entering monastic life is by the author of 774 Toulong zhuan. The present work 
is listed in the Bishu sheng xubiandao siku queshu mu (VDL 85). 

After having invoked the pantheon of patriarchs, the ordination ceremony starts 
(with a reading from the Benjijing Then follow the rites of clothing and 

capping. The final act is the fixing of the crown with the pin ( zanguan WM), which 
is done by the ordinand’s master (dushi ® ). The order in which the different vest- 

ments are presented and the hymns (zan jf ) that accompany them correspond to 
today’s practice. The dushi then expounds the Ten Precepts (shijie +Jt 2 )- These com- 
mandments correspond to the set of such interdictions in 177 Taishang dongzhen zhihui 
shangpin dajie ib-2b, an ancient Lingbao scripture. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Jinlu zhai toujian yi 

11 fols. 

Edited by Zhang Shangying (1043-1121) 

498 (fasc. 267) 

“Ritual of Casting Tablets, of the Golden Register Retreat.” The casting of tablets 
containing messages, together with images of dragons, into ravines and mountain cre- 
vasses was a usual practice performed at the conclusion of a solemn service comprising 
a Golden Register Retreat and a Great Universal Heavenly Offering ( putian dajiao H 
^^Sl) presented to 3,600 deities, defined here in terms of “share positions” ( fenwei 
jfitL)- The purpose of the ritual is to announce the merits obtained by the foregoing 
service to Heaven and Earth. 

The author was a high court official who received the order from Emperor Huizong 
Wi 7K (1101-1125) to revise the liturgy of the Golden Register Retreat. According to 
the colophon ( houxu 9a-na), which appears to be the presentation of the entire 

revision of the jinlu zhai of which the present text must have been the last 

chapter, Zhang recalls that the emperor had expressed his dissatisfaction with a new 
liturgy that had been recently elaborated by “some daoshi” at court. Zhang Shang- 
ying studied the earlier liturgies by Lu Xiujing, Du Guangting, and Yang Jie H§ 
M (fl. 1080) and revised the liturgy of the Retreat according to nine principles aimed 







[ 996 ] 3 .B .3 Lingbao 



3 .B .3 Lingbao [ 997 ] 



at weeding out inconsistencies and conforming to ancient usage. Zhang also found 
that the liturgy should have fewer names for the deities of the Tao and should be, in a 
general way, less adorned. 

The present ritual was performed on the sacred area of the Golden Register Retreat 
and Universal Offering service. The tablets were subsequently dispatched to their final 
destination. In spring and summer, this destination was the holy Mount Wangwu 
M [J_| for the mountain tablets ( shanjian |i|^) and the Jishui River, which has 
its source at the foot of Mount Wangwu, for the water tablets ( shuijian 7jcfi0 ). In au- 
tumn and winter, the tablets were addressed, respectively, to Mount Qian ?f| 1_L| and 
the Yangzi River at Caishi 7^75, both in Anhwei province. This ritual amounted to 
a considerable simplification with respect to the ceremonial for the toujian -j$ ^fj rites 
under earlier Song (960-1279) emperors (see Dongzhai jishi 1.4-5, and Chavannes, 
“Le jet des dragons”). The text edited by Zhang here is also much shorter than that of 
the same ritual by Du Guangting (see s 07 Taishang huanglu zhaiyi 55). The present 
version, moreover, presents some particulars: for instance, the Opening of the Incense 
Burner (falu 3a-b) is archaic and appears to be based on the early Tianshi dao 

fjtfi it tradition. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Luotian dajiao zaochao ke f§ A; X $1 V- 14 

7 fols. 

477 (fasc. 265) 

Luotian dajiao wuchao ke iH Lfc 0! 

7 fols. 

478 (fasc. 265) 

Luotian dajiao wanchao keWXKW:\Wi 

8 fols. 

479 (fasc. 265) 

“Morning, Noon, and Evening Audiences of the Great Offering to the Entire 
Firmament.” Wang Qinruo mentions the name luotian dajiao M LE j\ Sfj in 128s 
Yisheng baode zhuan (dated 1016), where it forms part of the ritual code— that is, the 
nomenclature and regulations for the different kinds of jiao H -services— revealed 
by the divine protector of the dynasty in 960. The highest level of the ritual is said 
to include three types of services, all of which were performed for the benefit of the 
country: theputian dajiao ff 7P yP ft! , the zhoutian dajiao |pj Tv ffi! , and the luotian 
dajiao. It is said that the luotian jiao may also be sponsored by commoners on behalf 
of the ruler (128s Yisheng baode zhuan i.ja-4a). The zhoutian and luotian jiao Offerings 



are well known already from the ritual documents of Du Guangting (see, e.g., the 
ci §§J supplication of a luotian jiao for the king of Shu, in 616 Guangcheng ji 9.5b-6b; 
cf. Verellen, “Liturgy and sovereignty,” 70). 

On 6 February 1015, Wang Qinruo was instructed by the emperor to edit the 
luotian jiaoyi in ten juan (Xu Zizhi tongjian changbian 86.10a). Having completed the 
work, he submitted it, accompanied by the memorial preserved in 1224 Daomen ding- 
zhi ?.ia-3a. According to this memorial, the work consisted of nine juan with the lists 
of deities (shengwei |5{5), and one juan with the actual ritual. It seems possible that 
the present group of rituals (perhaps together with the following 480 Luotian dajiao 
shejiaoyi) represents a part of, or even the totality of this one juan (the three rituals here 
formed a single juan originally, as stated explicidy in 477 Luotian dajiao zaochao ke ia). 
Note, however, that on one point, at least, the rituals differ from the Song standard 
received from Du Guangting: in the three offerings of incense (san nianxiang EL 
j/aflr) that follow immediately after the reading of the supplication. In the present 
liturgy the presentations of the incense end with an expression of allegiance to the 
Worthy of die Way (Daozun ijtH), the Worthy of the Scriptures (Jingzun fflft), 
and the Worthy of the Masters (Shizun jjtjjUt), respectively. While this practice accords 
with present-day liturgy (see, for instance, Ofuchi Ninji, Chugokujin no shukyd girei, 
274-76), the norm in Song dynasty rituals was to end in all three cases with an expres- 
sion of allegiance to the Worthy of the Masters. Compare 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 
22.2a-iob, where Jin Yunzhong criticizes the new custom— adopted, for instance, 
by J iang Shuyu in 50# Wushang huanglu dazhai licheng yi— of dividing the group of 
the Supreme Three Worthies (Taishang sanzun iPlj, i.e., the Three Pure Ones), 
to whom the incense is offered, and associating each with one of the Three Treasures 
(sanbao ELU). 

Poul Andersen 

Luotian dajiao shejiao yi $§ JL fi§ 15 fit; fit 

9 fols. 

480 (fasc. 265) 

“Ritual for the Display of Offerings of the Great Offering to the Endre Firmament.” 
This ritual belongs with the preceding three Audiences (477-479) and like these may 
derive from the luotian jiaoyi If )L 0® ffi established by Wang Qinruo. 

Poul Andersen 




[ 998 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 999 ] 



Jinlu dazhai suqi yt 2 H 2 0 

6 fols. 

484 (fasc. 266) 

Jinlu dazha i qimeng yi 

4 fols. 

48s (fasc. 266) 

Jinlu dazhai buzhi shuojie I M fit 

9 fols. 

486 (fasc. 266) 

Jinlu zaochao yi, Jinlu wuchao yi, Jinlu wanchao yi ^ H ?• & H 2 Ill fit 

7 fols., 6 fols., 7 fols. 

487 (fasc. 266) 

Jinlu zhai chanfang y* 2 H 0 t$c Ji fit 

10 fols. 

Attributed to Du Guangting ft (850-933) 

488 (fasc. 266) 

Jinlu jietan yi 2 H fW f S fit 

6 fols. 

489 (fasc. 266) 

Jinlu she jiao yi ^ H Wl H fit 

7 fols. 

490 (fasc. 266) 

Jinlu fangsheng yi 2 £$ ffil 0. fit 

4 fols. 

491 (fasc. 266) 

“Golden Register Retreat.” A complete liturgical service, intended to obtain 
blessings for the imperial family. Although the rituals have been catalogued as sepa- 
rate texts, they form a complete set, presented in the order in which they are to be 
performed. The rite of the Opening of the Incense Burner ( falu ft'M) is the same 
throughout and corresponds to the version revised by Yang Jie fif^, a high official 
at the court of Emperor Shenzong (r. 1068 - 1085 ). Yang revised Du Guangting’s 
liturgical texts (see 498 Jinlu zhai toujianyi 9b). One of the changes Yang made was to 
alter the tide of the supreme Taoist deity, from Most True Jade Emperor on High of 
the Great Infinite Supreme Tao (Taishang wuji dadao zhizhen yuhuang shangdi 2 _h 



Jjt W. 2 iB 2 . R 3 £ 2 ir. "ff? ; see so 8 Wushcmg huanglu dazhai lichengyi i6.3b-5a) to Jade 
Emperor on High in the August Sky of the Most Sacred Three Pure Ones (Sanqing 
shangsheng haotian yuhuang shangdi )■ The present set of 

rituals dates, however, from a later period, because the offering ritual 490 Jinlu shejiao 
yi mentions, on page 3a, among the host of saints to be invited to the banquet, the 
Heavenly Master of die thirtieth generation, Zhang Jixian JfHH 2 (1092-1126; here 
called Xujing zhenjun fM 5ft R H ). The same text mentions, on page 5a, the fact that 
the present liturgy had been composed on imperial orders. 

The ritual 483 Jinlu zhai qitan yi , which die Ming editors of the canon placed just 
before the present set, is not part of this modern liturgy. 

The Nocturnal Announcement (484 Jinlu dazhai suqi yi) ritual is very simple. 
Many rites that normally are part of a suqi iff are missing, such as die installation 
of the Five True Writs (an wu zhenwen 2 2 (R 2 ; cf. 483 Jinlu qitan yi 8b-9b and 1411 
Dongxuan lingbao changye zhi fu jiuyou yugui mingzhen ke 35b— 37a). The rites of confir- 
mation of the officiants ( buzhi ) and the subsequent promulgation of the rules to 
be observed during the service (shuojie M IS) are normally also part of the suqi ritual. 
Here they form a distinct ritual (486 Jinlu dazhai puzhi shuojie yi; see below). 

The next ritual in the present service is a sermon to the participants in the retreat. 
Called qimeng (address to the sworn [brothers and sisters]), this is a speech by 
the grand master (gaogong jij ijj ) at the beginning of the service, on the significance of 
the Retreat (for similar sermons by Lu Xiujing, see 349 Taishang dongxuan lingbao 
fazhujing 2b). 

The sermon enumerates twenty-seven kinds of Retreat: the “interior” ones, such 
as the Fast of the Heart (xinzhai 20 ) of Zhuangzi, as well as those of the “exterior.” 
There are four interior zhai 0 related to the mystical practices of the Shangqing jing h 
and to other traditions, and twenty-three (the number twenty-two on page 3a is 
a mistake) exterior retreats, including the jinlu zhai 2 $S 0 itself. The latter, together 
with four other kinds of Retreat, is to be accomplished by the emperor; the remain- 
ing eighteen types of liturgical service are for commoners. Among these “popular” 
rites, we find the well-known Yellow Register Retreat (huanglu zhai HII 0 ), as well 
as less-known forms such as the tianbao zhai 2 {2 0 and the beidi zhai 200 . The 
last ritual to be listed is the Retreat for the Conversion of Barbarians (huahu zhai it 
(Jfi 0 ). The text emphasizes that retreat rituals originated in the Lingbao tradition. 

The next item, 486 Jinlu dazhai puzhi shuojie yi, concerns the confirmation of the 
officiants ( buzhi) and the subsequent promulgation of the rules to be observed during 
the service (shuojie), which here form a distinct ritual. According to Yang Jie’s version 
of the Golden Register Retreat, these rites had to take place separately in front of die 
Master in the Netherworld (xuanshi 2 fiffj ; see 1226 Daomen tongjiao biyongji 6.3a-b). 
The same text can be found in 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu 16. 




[ iooo ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1001 ] 



The three audiences (487 Jinlu zaochaoyi, Jinlu wuchaoyi, Jinlu wancbaoyi) are again 
simple. There is no indication that there was a presentation of written memorials (ci 
!§]) was part of the proceedings. The spells to invoke protective deities (welling zhu (if 
Itfti) are similar to those found in modern texts (compare^ Jidujinshu n.2b-4b). 

The text of 4-88 Jinlu zhai chanfling yi is attributed to Du Guangting. The chan- 
fang 1 H fj were rites of penitence and remorse confessed toward the Ten Directions of 
the universe as part of the Audiences. Here not only do they form a separate item, but 
the idea of the confession of sins appears to be lacking in the text. This singular form 
of chanfang cannot be found in any of the liturgies written by Du Guangting, and 
the attribution we have here is therefore highly doubtful. 

The work 489 Jinlu jietan yi contains the ritual of the dispersion of the altar, which 
is the symmetrical opposite of the suqi ritual. Here the rite of removing the Five True 
Writs is mentioned on page 4a, whereas, as we have seen, the initial installation of 
these writs is absent from 484 Jinlu dazhai suqi yi. 

The offering ritual in 490 Jinlu shejiaoyi is again simple. The rites for the liberation 
of living beings (491 Jinlu fangsheng yi) show, as is to be expected, marked Buddhist 
influence. Here, too, the complete text can be found in 466 Jidujinshu 2i.4a-7b, the 
sole difference being that where our text refers to the patron of the ritual as shengzhu 
W i (sage patron), implying the emperor, die ritual manual substitutes zhaizu U Ti 
(Retreat patron). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Tulu sanri jiuchao yi 31 M H 0 fl id {H 

3 juan 

505 (fasc. 269) 

“Morning, Noon, and Evening Audience Rituals for Three Successive Days of a 
Jade Register Retreat.” The final Evening Audience is lacking. The rituals are entirely 
classical in their articulation and wording. The introit hymns are taken from the Pac- 
ing the Void hymns ( buxu JsfM) by the Song emperor Huizong (r. 1100-1125; cf. 607 
Tuyin fashi). These Audiences could apparently be used in any kind of service, as there 
is no specific reference to either the repose of the dead or blessings for the living. The 
vows for the welfare of the ruling dynasty are common to all Audience rituals. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Tulu jiyou panhu yi $4 fit 

9 fols. 

506 (fasc. 269) 

“Tending the [Food] Measure to Save [the Souls] in Darkness, a Ritual for the Jade 
Register Retreat.” This is a Taoist pudu H ® ritual for the feeding of the hungry ghosts 



and the saving of the abandoned souls (guhun 2 He®)- The final hymn (8b-9a) in this 
comparatively short ritual has a distinctly popular quality. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Huanglu shinian yiM H “KH; HI 

7 fols. 

510 (fasc. 291) 

Huanglu wulao daowang yi MMJL fc ll fit 

4 fols. 

511 (fasc. 291) 

Huanglu zhai shi tianzun yiM II HU + ^ I? fit 

8 fols. 

512 (fasc. 291) 

Huanglu zhai shizhou sandao badu yi if H + ffH H H Jfi ® fH 

11 fols. 

513 (fasc. 291) 

“Yellow Register Retreat.” These four rituals for requiem services belong to a single 
modern and popular liturgy. The first ritual, sio Shinian yi, centers around the rite of 
the Ten Devotions ( shinian -p;^), doing obeisance to the gods of the Ten Directions. 
Each invocation is followed by a short hymn. The ritual begins with the recitation of 
the Taoist version of the Buddhist Three Refuges ( sangui Hff). 

The si 1 Wulao daowang yi is a mourning rite paying homage to the Five Elders (wu- 
lao TL 3 £): the Heavenly Lords (tianjun of the five cardinal points. Here each 

invocation is followed by a long hymn in seven-syllable verse in vernacular narrative. 
The third ritual, 3x2 Shi tianzun yi, pays respect to the Heavenly Worthies of the Ten 
Directions, while si 3 Shizhou sandao yi describes in prose and in vernacular poetry the 
blessings of the paradises of the Ten Islands and the Three Isles of the Immortals, the 
hopeful destination of the deceased on whose behalf the rituals were celebrated. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Huanglu jiuyou jiao wuai yezhai cidi yi If fj| jl 0 ! M fK H #1 

29 fols. 

Southern Song (1127-1279)? 

514 (fasc. 291) 

“Outline of the Ritual for the Unobstructed Night Retreat and the Offering to [the 
Souls in] the Nine Realms of Darkness of the Yellow Register.” These are the complete 
instructions for the performance of a ritual for universal salvation ( pudu s'®) of 




3 .B .3 Lingbao [ 1003 ] 



[ 1002 ] 3 .B .3 Lingbao 

Orphan Souls (guhun ffiUjfi), to be performed as a deed of merit following a major 
Yellow Register requiem service for a deceased person. 

The text is enhanced by a detailed map of the layout of the sacred area ( daochang j|f 
f§) for the pudu ritual (26a-27b). The presentation of different documents is accompa- 
nied by the offering of “money and horses” ( qianma M ) for their transmission (2a). 
The indications concerning the administrative divisions of the empire into prefectures 
(fit iff ) followed by districts (xian g| ) indicate a Song date for this text. This kind of 
pudu rite became a general feature of requiem services during the Southern Song. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Huanglu jiuku shizhai zhuanjing yi M ^ -f M $! I? fH 

19 fols. 

Southern Song (1127-1279) 

509 (fasc. 291) 

“Ritual of the Tenfold Scripture Recitation for the Yellow Register Retreat That 
Saves from Distress.” The scripture to be recited ten times in succession is 374 Taishang 
dongxuan lingbao jiuku miaojing. The aim of the ritual is the salvation of the souls of 
the ancestors of the patron of the Retreat (zhaizhu KS?±). A similar ritual, which con- 
stitutes in fact a small service, is described in the colophon written by Zhao Ziqiu IS 
-p{^ at the end of 374 Jiuku miaojing. 

Each successive recitation is adressed to one of the ten Tianzun enumerated in 374 
Jiuku miaojing , and each Tianzun corresponds to a given direction. Thus, the present 
ritual is in fact composed of ten smaller rituals, each having its own rites of invocation 
(qingshen If!?), danced Procession (sanhua f tvc). Ascending the chair (shengzuo |5g 
M5), Scripture recitation ( yanjing MIS), and presentation of a memorial, complete 
with talisman and other documents for its transmission (xuanfu m and shuguan 0i 
Hi). Finally, the deities are sent back [songsheng j§lg). At the conclusion of the ritual, 
there is a sermon ( tanjing DHI1 ). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Difu shiwang badu yi t & fff + fit ® [ft 

12 fols. 

Song (960-1279) 

215 (fasc. 84) 

“Ritual of the Ten Kings of Hell for Salvation from Sin.” The aim of this ritual is 
to deliver the souls of the deceased from die ten hells situated under Mount Fengdu. 
The priest presents incense to each of the Ten Kings in turn and then sings two hymns 
for them, so that they will allow the deceased to leave hell for “the land of happiness.” 
Each week after a person’s death his or her soul leaves one of the ten hells; by the end of 



the forty-nine day mourning period the soul has thus traversed seven hells. The eighth 
hell corresponds to the merit service of the hundredth day after death, die ninth to 
the first anniversary of the death, and the last to “the gready auspicious event” of the 
definitive departure from hell. 

A Ritual of the Ten Kings to be chanted is mentioned in 219 Lingbao wuliang duren 
shangjing dafa 71.11a. The present ritual may be compared with the Thanksgiving to 
the Ten Kings (Xie shiwang Hf + £ ) in 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu I72.5b-i3a. 

John Lagerwey 

Taiji jilian neifa 

3 juan 

By Zheng Sixiao , boo Suonan f'ffJl (1241-1318) 

548 (fasc. 312) 

“Inner Method of Taiji for Sacrificing to and Sublimating [the Souls of the De- 
ceased].” The present edition of this text, linked by its title to Ge Xuan (Taiji zuo- 
xian weng flljil), dates to 1406 (see the preface of the Forty-third Heavenly 

Master, Zhang Yuchu). Zheng Sixiao, a Southern Song scholar, poet, and painter 
from Fuzhou, lived in retirement in Suzhou after the fall of the Song in 1279. In a 
postface, Zheng states that he completed a Jilian yiliie in 1270 (3.41a). A 

second postface by Zheng, dated 1276, mentions his transmission of this book to a 
disciple and notes that he had written a similar work on the Buddhist Universal Salva- 
tion ritual ( pudu ilf ). A third postface, by Zheng’s disciple Shen Zhiwo and 

dated 1291, states that Zheng produced an “augmented and corrected” version of the 
book in response to Shen’s request for “more complete” explanations. Three further 
prefaces, all dated 1347, attribute to one Wang Daogui (var. l£) of the Xuan- 

ming daoyuan Bfl ill Ptc of Suzhou the edition of that year (the woodblocks of the 

original edition had burned in a fire). A fifth preface, undated and by Zheng Sixiao, 
was written at the same time as the postface by his disciple Shen Zhiwo. 

The present book is divided into two sections: the ritual as such, called neifa 
(juan 1), and explanations of the ritual, titled neifa yiliie F*3?£s*tB§ (juan 2 and 3; cf. 
the title given by Zheng in his postface of 1270). A ritual of this kind can be included 
in an ordinary Yellow Register Retreat, but it is in reality a Taoist pudu H (see 466 
Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu 2.10b and juan 114). Jin Yunzhong criticized the attribu- 
tion of what he called this “now current” rite to Ge Xuan (see 1223 Shangqing lingbao 
dafa i3.ia-b). Jin states (13.24a) that the use of the Danyangfu (see the present 

book, 1. 6a) in the ritual was characteristic of the. jilian as performed in Zhedong 

(cf. soS Wushang huanglu dazhai licheng yi 27.16b). 

In his preface, Zhang Yuchu mentions five schools of sublimation rites and places 
Zheng’s work in the Danyang school. This attribution is confirmed by the title of 



: 



[ ioo4 ] 3 .B .3 Lingbao 

Wang Xuanzhen’s UR version of this ritual in 1220 Dmfa huiyuan 210. Wang says 
in his preface, dated 1356, that his chief model had been the ritual of Zheng Sixiao. 

Zheng is noteworthy for his insistence on the interior character of this rite. Even the 
recitation of scriptures is to be done “in the heart” and not with the lips (2.4b). “He 
who is not in a state of profound trance [sheading : (f ] cannot perform it. He who 

has not cut himself off forever from all sexual desire cannot enter into trance” (3.38a). 
The officiant, or rather the adept, performs the ritual seated ( dazuo f] ^ ) alone in 
his or her oratory. To practice it, the adept must “have transcended entirely the ‘Great 
Offering of the Yellow Register”’ (3.38b). 

For the correct dates of Zheng Sixiao, who lived to the age of seventy-eight years 
(sui M), see 3.42a. 

John Lagerwey 

Chaozhen fayuan chanhui wen ‘III] R M f® If? St 

3 fols. 

1453 (fasc. 1064) 

Lingbao shishi fa if 

5 fols. 

Thirteenth century or later 

1454 (fasc. 1064) 

“Text of the Audience with the Zhenren, for Making the Vows and Confessing 
the Sins”; “Lingbao Method of Distributing Food.” These two minor rituals belong 
together, as the latter prescribes (ia) the recitation of the “same formulas of invoca- 
tion for absolution from the Three Deeds [sanye H H ; Skt. trividha-dvara] as in the 
preceding Chaozhen chanV Since a few lines farther on, the deified Sa Shoujian $1 vf 
1? (fl. 1141) is invoked under the title Yiyuan wushang jiuku Sajun zhenren — jtMAl 

^ H It iR A , the texts are unlikely to have existed before the thirteenth century. 

The first ritual has a simple structure: formulas of invocation; addresses to the 
divinities; confessions of sin; vows; and requests for forgiveness. 

Of the method of distributing food that follows, it is said that it can be practiced daily. 
A spoonful of rice set aside from the morning meal forms the basis of the ritual held in 
the evening. After the divinity of the location (tudi zhengshen :h Iffi IE -($ ) has been visu- 
alized and the Jiuku jing has been recited, the various divinities are addressed. 

Then the hungry ghosts and destitute souls are invited to feast. With the food that has 
been transformed into an unlimited quantity ( bianhuafashi H ffc ?£ ^ ) by meditative 
techniques and formulas, all souls in the ten directions of space can be fed. 

A similar method can be found in 1220 Daofa huiyuan 207 under the name “Taiji Ge 
xianweng shishi fa which again is closely related to the practice 

named “[Taiji Ge xianweng jilian flliH in 1223 Shangqing lingbao da-fa 



3 .B .3 Lingbao [ 100s ] 

13. A survey of numerous variants of this method is contained in 54# Taiji jilian neifa 
2.7b-i2b, 3.26b-28a. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Lingbao wujing tigang S Sf fi H? Si 8$ 

10 fols. 

Twelfth or thirteenth century 

529 (fasc. 295) 

“Summary of Five Lingbao Scriptures.” This summary probably dates from the 
twelfth or thirteenth century. It cites (7a) Zhou Dunyi’s [5] Sfc [5ff (1017-1073) Taiji tu 
shuo ;fcfs§ Ba& and is cited in 399 Taishang dongxuan lingbao tianzun shuo jiuku miao- 
jing zhujie i7b-i8b. The five scriptures are 318 Dongxuan lingbao ziranjiutian shengshen 
zhangjing, 620 Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing miaojing , 13 Gaoshang yuhuang xin- 
yin jing , 374 Taishang dongxuan lingbao jiuku miaojing , and 24 Tuanshi tianzun shuo 
shengtian dedao jing. 

Our text is a minor liturgy for the souls of the deceased. In the frame of this ritual 
a brief exegesis of each of the five scriptures is given before the whole scripture is re- 
cited. Liturgical instructions mark, among other things, the cues for the mourners to 
join in. 

For the use of these scriptures during the huanglu jf f| ritual in Song times, see, 
for example, 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 29.15a (listing.?/# Jiutian shengshen zhangjing 
and 620 Qingjing miaojing), 1226 Daomen tongjiao biyongji 8.7a-8a (listing 620 Qingjing 
miaojing, 374 Jiuku miaojing, and 24 Shengtian dedao jing), and so 8 Wushang huanglu 
dazhai lichengyi 12.2b (listing 318 Jiutian shengshen zhangjing, 374 Jiuku miaojing, and 24 
Shengtian dedao jing). The recitation of/.? Gaoshang yuhuang xinyin jing is not attested 
in those works. Most likely it is also the latest of the five scriptures. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Daomen kef an daquan ji jil H f 4 15 ik. ife ^ 

86 juan 

Partially attributed to Du Guangting ft it IM (850—933); edited by Zhong Li 

ftja W (early fifteenth century) 

1225 (fasc. 976-983) 

“Complete Collection of Taoist Liturgy.” Part of this handbook appears under the 
name of Du Guangting, whereas juan 25-47— as well as 63, 65, 66, and 67— are at- 
tributed to Zhong Li. The final juan are not signed. The ascriptions to Du can be only 
an evocation of the latter’s reputation as a liturgist, because there are many indications 
that the handbook is of a much later date and that many different sources were used 
by the editor. 




[ ioo6 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1 007 ] 



Juan 63, which contains a Ritual for the Great Offering for the Marvelous Response 
of the True Warrior ( Zhenwu lingying dajiao yi IJt ^ ft fig A g® (g ), has a note stating 
that Zhong Li made use of three versions: a ritual for a Retreat of the Emperor of the 
North (Beidi zhaiyi A'rjfUFit) by Du Guangting, a second and similar ritual by 
Shi Hao (1106-1194; see 297 Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian xubian 4.17b), and yet 
another ritual by Chao Guan JEtH (fl. 1127-1130; cf. 63.5a in the present text). In juan 
25, which is signed by Zhong Li, we find the honorary tide of Jiutian jinque lingji 
hongen zhenjun AA ife [Ml M ill A M R S for the Fujian saints Xu Zhizheng 
If and Xu Zhi’e A If (25.4b). The saints received this tide in 1418 (see 1470 Xuxian 
zhenlu 1.6a), which implies that Zhong Li lived in the early fifteenth century, and as 
the style of the handbook is homogeneous throughout, it is most likely that Zhong 
edited the entire work. 

The handbook contains the rituals for some twenty different liturgical services. 
Each service comprises a ritual for the inauguration of the altar (qitan JjfSf J|[ or suqi 

), three Audiences (chao ^ ), and an Offering (jiao H ). The majority of the services 
are in honor of the stars that govern destiny. There is a service for obtaining rain (juan 
10-18) and for posterity (juan 25-29). A ritual for presenting offerings to popular saints 
closes the handbook. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Jinlu qishou zao, wu, wanchao yi ^ H ff M ¥■ A Rft #1 H 

7 + 7 + 6 fols. 

492 (fasc. 266) 

Jinlu shangshou sanxian yi ^ H h H H fH 

4 fols. 

493 (fasc. 267) 

Jinlu yanshou she jiao yi 

7 fols. 

Ming 

494 (fasc. 267) 

“Golden Register Rituals for the Celebration of the Emperor’s Anniversary.” The 
text of this service is close, at times identical, to that of 484-491 Jinlu zhaiyi. The pres- 
ent corpus should therefore belong to the same group of rituals. 

In their present version, the rites must have been performed for the Ming emperors 
(see, e.g., 493 Jinlu shangshou sanxian yi 3a). The service was celebrated at the request 
of the emperor (see 492 Jinlu qishou zao, wu, wanchao yi 3a). The latter was represented 
by an officer tided liguan (ff 'Q' (see 493 Sanxian yi ia). The officiants were masters of 
the Zhengyi IE — • order (493 Sanxian yi 2b). 



The principal deity of the service is Xuandu wanshou tianzun S H M A % (see 
493 Sanxian yi 4a and passim). Among the other deities invoked are the Old Man of the 
South Pole (Nanji laoren [$I A A) and the three stellar deities of the Three Bless- 
ings (Fu Lu Shou xing zhenjun fSlISSKIf). The ritual of the Three Offerings 
(sanxian yi A IK fH ) is especially devoted to these three popular deities, and includes 
the recitation of 620 Taishang laojun shuo chang qingjing miaojing. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Jinlu xuanling zhuanjing zao, wu, wanchao xingdao yi 

10 + 9 + 9 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644) 

495 (fasc. 267) 

“Rituals for the Morning, Noon, and Evening Audiences, with Scripture Recita- 
tion.” The scripture to be “revolved” here is 622 Taishang xuanling beidou benming 
yansheng zhenjing. The triple Audience service is intended for the blessing of the Ming 
dynasty and the longevity of the emperor; it is to be performed on the latter’s birth- 
day. 

The rituals are part of a Golden Register Retreat (jinlu zhai The texts are 

similar to 484-494 Jinlu zhai yi. Recitations of sacred scriptures are part of the jinlu 
zhai performance; thus the present liturgies probably belong to the same set of court 
rituals. 

At each of the Audiences, 622 Beidou jing is recited three times, thus nine times in 
all. At the conclusion of each of the recitations, an incense offering is made to a given 
direction (fang fj). The fifth offering is directed to the center (zhonggong A "A; see 
“Wuchao yi”; 7a, where shengong A Ej is an error for zhonggong). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Jinlu shihui duren zao, wu, wanchao kaishouyi 

11 + 10 + 7 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644) 

496 (fasc. 267) 

“Rituals for the Morning, Noon, and Evening Audiences of the Golden Register 
[Retreat], with Tenfold Recitation of the [Scripture on the] Salvation of Humanity.” 
The scripture in question is 1 Taishang dongxuan lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miao- 
jing 1. Ten times this scripture is solemnly opened (kai [If) and recited: four times 
at the Morning Audience, four times at the Noon Audience, and two times at the 
Evening Audience. After each recitation, a memorial (biao Jk ) is presented in order to 




[ jooS ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1009 ] 



announce the merit obtained. At the conclusion of the ten recitations, the scripture is 
stored ( shou lf£), that is, closed and shelved. 

The present rituals form part of a service of the Golden Register Retreat ( jinlu zhai 
for the celebration of the anniversaries of the emperors of the Ming dynasty. 
They belong to the same set of protocols as 492-494 Jinlu zhaiyi. 

This kind of tenfold recitation is prescribed in the text of the Scripture on the Salva- 
tion of Humanity itself. An analogous ritual can be found in 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu 
jinshu 132-34. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Jinlu shihui duren zao, wu, wanchao zhuanjing yi 

12 + 8 + 9 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644) 

497 (fasc. 267) 

“Rituals for the Morning, Noon, and Evening Audiences of the Golden Register 
[Retreat], with Tenfold Recitation of the [Scripture on the] Salvation of Humanity.” 
The scripture to be recited is / Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing 1 . Like the pre- 
ceding 496 Jinlu shihui duren zao, wu, wanchao kaishouyi , these rituals were intended for 
the celebration of the emperor’s birthday as part of a larger Golden Register Retreat. 

The present rituals are more elaborate than the preceding ones. They include, at the 
beginning and the end of each Audience, distinct rites for the invocation and thanks- 
giving to the patriarchs (gishi and xieshi U®). These rites are conducted at a 
special altar, the shitang §fp 'a' or shimu I® H . 

The rituals here also mention explicitly the performance of a number of secret rites 
(jingnian literally, “silent recitations”) which should be accompanied by the 

chief officiant (see “Zaochao,” 5b, 6b, and na). These secret meditation rites, especially 
those invoking the Thirty-two Heavens of the Scripture on the Salvation of Humanity, 
are of the same type as those found in 1223 Shangjing lingbao dafa 5.i5a-b. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Tulu zidu suqi yi M H ® ?§ I? fit 

7 fols. 

499 (fasc. 268) 

Tulu zidu jietan yi 5 II 'M ® ffl JJi fit 

8 fols. 

500 (fasc. 268) 



Tulu zidu shejiao yi 31 H 'M ls£ Si fH 

7 fols. 

501 (fasc. 268) 

Tulu zidu zao, wu, wanchao yi I H 'M ^ 

6 + 6 + 6 fols. 

502 (fasc. 268) 

Tulu shengshen zidu zhuanjing yi ; R ® $$ fH 

27 fols. 

503 (fasc. 268) 

Tulu shengshen zidu kaishou yi I H .T. 'I? ® [Jfl fH 

17 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644) 

504 (fasc. 269) 

“Rituals for the [Retreat] of the Jade Register for Assistance in Salvation.” This is 
a complete service, to be conducted at court, under the auspices of the emperor. The 
text is close, and at places even identical, with that of the Golden Register Retreat of 
484-491 Jinlu zhaiyi. The rituals of S03 Tulu shengshen zidu zhuanjing yi and 304 Tulu 
shengshen zidu kaishouyi concern the recitation of 318 Dongxuan lingbao ziranjiutian 
shengshen zhangjing (cf. 497 Jinlu shihui duren zao, wu, wanchao zhuanjing yi and 496 
Jinlu shihui duren zao, wu, wanchao kaishouyi). 

Several elements in the present texts, such as the canonization tide of Rentian 
jiaozhu huagai fuqiu zhenjun ( S03 Zhuanjing yi 7a) and die 

list of patriarchs of the Qingwei f^' 0 . school of Taoism (303 Zhuanjing yi ia), confirm 
that they date from the Ming dynasty. 

The history and function of the Jade Register Retreat remains problematic. Al- 
though the three registers ( sanlu H$S)— that is, the Yellow, Golden and Jade Regis- 
ters— constitute the foundation of the Lingbao liturgy (see 330 Dongxuan lingbao yulu 
jianwen sanyuan weiyi ziran zhenjing), only rituals for the huanglu zhai and the jinlu 
zhai seem to have been current during the Six Dynasties (220-589) period (the affir- 
mation of CGF 43 that Lu Xiujing composed a yulu zhai TLMX is not confirmed 
elsewhere). During the Tang (618-907), one encounters the name of the yulu zhai but 
nothing more. The work 1124 Dongxuan lingbao xuanmen dayi i4b-i5a quotes a Dong- 
shenjing saying: “The jinlu zbai abolishes the disasters sent from Heaven and 

confirms the supremacy of the emperor . . . , whereas the yulu zhai brings blessing to 
those who confess their faults and ask for benedictions.” However, 464 Zhaijie lu 5a 
quotes this very passage from 1124 Xuan daomen dayi, with an addition stating that the 
yulu zhai “has not yet been revealed in this world.” 




[ ioio ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



For Du Guangting, the yulu zhai was, together with thejinlu zhai, one of the 
retreats to be performed in the imperial palace, and thej yulu zhai especially concerned 
the health and graces of the imperial spouses and consorts (see Du’s preface to the 
huanglu zhai service, quoted in 1224 Daomen dingzhi 6.1b). Following Du, many au- 
thors expressed the opinion that the yulu zhai was the retreat service for the benefit 
of the imperial spouses. The Forty-third Heavenly Master, Zhang Yuchu 
(1361-1410), even confirms that only the empresses and imperial consorts have the 
right to celebrate the service ( 1232 Daomen shigui 10a). In 1407, the Yongle emperor 
called upon Zhang Yuchu to celebrate a great y ulu zhai at the court (see 1463 Han Tian- 
shi shijia 3.28b). 

Kristofer Schipper 

3.B.3.d Manuals 

Daomen dingzhi jUH/Ej ffi 1 ! 

1 folio + 10 juan 

Compiled by Lii Yuansu edited by HuXianglong Sfi ; preface dated 

1188 

1224 (fasc. 973 - 975 ) 

Established Order of Taoism.” According to Siku quanshu zongmu tiyao 147, this 
text was composed of a first collection ( qianji fjffH) in five juan, compiled in 1188 by 
Lii Yuansu, and a later collection ( houji faM) in six juan, compiled in 1201 by Lii’s 
disciple, Lii Taihuan Marks of subsequent additions to the text led the editors 

of the Siku tiyao to suggest that their recension of the “Established Order” was printed 
during the Yuan dynasty (1279-1368). 

The text in the Daozang , although it comprises only ten juan, is indeed divided 
into two such collections, but only the personal preface ( zixu g/T) of the first col- 
lection is signed and dated (1188). The personal preface to the second collection is 
neither signed nor dated, but two notes in the text, at 6.15b and 7.36b, are signed by 
Lii Yuansu and dated to the year 1201. Nowhere is Lii Taihuan mentioned. The role of 
Hu Xianglong — was his the Yuan edition referred to above? -is difficult to ascertain, 
inasmuch as only one note, at 4.3ib-32b, can be ascribed to him with any degree of 
probability. 

Lii Yuansu, zi Puan ji , identifies himself in the first preface as a native of Tang’an 
(modern Chongqing 9#® in Sichuan). In his preface to 1226 Daomen tongjiao 
biyong ji, dated 1201, Lii identifies himself as a native of Jiangyuan £ 0 ^ (west of 
Chengdu) and says that he was in charge of the Yellow Register in the area of the 
two rivers (the Chengdu basin). Wei Liaoweng I® T Hi, in his Heshan xiansheng 
daquan wenji 42.3b-6a, tells how Lii, ‘Taoist Master of the Tianqing ^gg Abbey,” 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ ion ] 



built a special terrace in 1207 in order to pray for the protection of the local popula- 
tion against bandits. In his prefaces to the present work and to the 1226 Tongjiao ji, Lii 
describes himself as an avid collector of Taoist books whose aim was to produce and 
print standardized texts of Taoist rituals that would avoid the excessive complexity 
of many contemporary manuals and eliminate the textual errors typical of privately 
transmitted liturgical manuscripts. 

The first collection, which Lii refers to as the Dingzhi ji gj Sft (1.12a, 6.1a), be- 

gins with a discussion of the correct way of writing Taoist documents and then gives 
seven model petitions. Lii’s tradition in this area is close to that of Jiang Shuyu 
(i.i5a-i6a and i.22a-25a correspond to so 8 Wushang huanglu dazhai lichengyi n.ia-b 
and n.ib-sb, respectively) and to that of the older 61s Chisong zi zhangli (cf. i.28b-38b 
and 61s Chisong zi zhangli 5.26a-34b). 

Documents of announcement to the spiritual powers of the Three Realms are sup- 
plied in juan 2. Composed essentially of documents of invitation for the Offering, juan 
3 begins with a memorial addressed to the emperor Zhenzong (r. 997-1022). Wang 
Qinruo (962-1025) wrote the memorial in 1009, on the subject of the official defini- 
tion of the hierarchy of gods for the Offering to the Entire Firmament {Luotian jiao 
H 3 ^ St )■ This memorial is followed by the emperor’s response. A second text, by Sun 
Xubo iM 6 , a Taoist master at Huizong’s (r. 1100-1125) court, discusses the number 
of emplacements (wei \\L) to be prepared with offerings of paper money and horses 
(1 qianma $|J|) for the various types of offering and retreat. The bulk of the juan is 
taken up by a list of the 1,200 divinities to be invited, using 100 separate documents 
of invitation, to the huanglu luotian jiao If HHB^St. Lii says in a note (3.46a) that he 
prepared the list, after consulting with Li Zhongda $ by comparing an imperi- 
ally promulgated text— presumably that of Sun Xubo ffilM — with the “rituals of 

old.” Lii gives the canonical source of each group of divinities included in the list, and 
he states emphatically that any divinity that cannot be traced to such a source should 
not be invited, especially those gods who had not received an investiture ( fenghao 
%n . ) from the court or whose names had been revealed by mediumistic writing ( jiangbi 
3 - 49 a). 

Juan 4 furnishes the few fu that Lii recognizes as legitimate. Juan 5 provides model 
memorials (shu ®f() containing full ritual programs for the retreats of the Yellow Reg- 
ister, and of the Alliance with the zhenren, and for the Prevention of Catastrophes. 

The aim of the later collection, according to its personal preface, is to “fill the la- 
cunae” left by the first one. Juan 6 begins with a general survey of the different types 
of retreat. Notes here reveal that Lii relied in the first place on the authority of Du 
Guangting, but also on the “head of the immortals” ( weixian HJfff ), Chao Guan 
Jjllil, author of a Huanglu yi fflffJl (6.4b, 15b). Juan 6 also contains model ciwen gBj 

memorials, three of which are by Ouyang Xiu (1007-1072; 6.9a-ioa; cf. 




[ ion ] 3 .B .3 Lingbao 



3 .B .3 Lingbao [ 1013 ] 



Ouyang Wenzhong gong ji 82.3b-4a, 83.i5b-i6a, 84.1a). A note at the end of the juan 
also mentions the Jinluyi dill fit of Zhang Shangying. 

Juan 7 gives texts of petitions for twelve different rituals (7.8a-ioa corresponds 
to 617 Tats bang xuanci zhuhna zhang 3-5a-6b; 7.i9a-22a to 617 Zhuhua zhang i.ia-8a, 
passim). At the end of the juan, Lii states that he consulted the Tianshi qian erbai 
guanzhang jing d; ® d 1 H 1 U H" $ f! to verify all the names of the Celestial Officers 
( tianguan ) used in his petitions. 

Juan 8 provides the symbolic characters and incantations necessary for the creation 
of the altar in the various rituals. One passage (8.22b-23b), attributed to the Master in 
the Beyond, is identical to S47 Lingbao yujian 24.3b-5a (cf. 147 Lingbao wuliang duren 
shangpin miaojingfutu 2.3a-4b). 

Juan 9 contains further documents of invitation, such as for the Wenchang liturgy, 
which includes a seat and offering for Confucius (9.6a). The tenth and last juan is 
composed primarily of documents for a ritual of initiation. 

John Lagerwey 

Song Zhenzong yuzhi yujingji B zj? M fi 3 £ R Wt 

6 juan 

By Emperor Zhenzong of the Song dynasty (Zhao Dechang r. 997-1022) 

315 (fasc. 163) 

“Collectanea of the Jade Capital.” A collection of Intentions (yi ^ ), presumably 
written by the emperor himself, for memorials presented during Taoist rituals. The 
present work is mentioned in Yuhai 28.10b as having twenty juan. The Daozang ver- 
sion must, therefore, be incomplete. 

Nevertheless, this is a most important document for the study of religious events 
during Zhenzong’s reign. It contains a text (“Xie jiang Tianshu biao HfPf d:fll§”) 
expressing thanks for the bestowal of the Heavenly Writs (4.9a), for die conclusion of 
the feng M sacrifice on Taishan (4.9b), for the supernatural apparition of the imperial 
ancestor (95.3a), and for other important occasions. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Daomen tongjiao biyongji M H iS ffl M 

3+5 fols. + 9 juan. 

Compiled by Lii Taigu § ft dJ ; preface dated 1201 

1226 (fasc. 984-985) 

“Comprehensive and Requisite Manuals of Taoism.” This manual is preceded by 
two prefaces and a table of contents. The first preface, by Lii Yuansu StcM, author of 
1224 Daomen dingzhi , is dated to the year 1201; the second, by Han Huncheng jjlfiSc, 
is dated to the Yuanzhen reign era (1295-1296). Lii’s preface describes how he entrusted 



to the “young master” Lii Taigu— Lii Yuansu’s disciple, according to Wei Liaoweng M 
T il ( Heshan xiansheng daquan wenji 42.4a) — the task of comparing the various ritual 
texts brought back from the capital by Li Zhongda ^ 4 1 ^ at Lii Yuansu’s request 
with those in the abbey’s own library, in order to prepare a standard version of the 
rituals composing the Yellow Register Retreat. Han Huncheng, hao Wuzhen dashi f§ 
of the Ren’an guan temple, says that the present compilation was in 

reality the work of Ma Daoyi MM ill, a Taoist of the Sanjing guan ELfrM temple 
in Chengdu, who combined Lii Taigu’s Tongjiao ji and a Lianjiaoji 

by a Mr. He fnf ofYuntai (presumably the mountain of that name southeast of 
Cangxi county) and printed the result. A close reading of the text, however, 

would seem to indicate that Ma made few changes (see table of contents, 2a; 3.4b, 5a; 
7.18b) and that the work remains largely that of Lii Taigu. 

Lii divides his work into eight sections that correspond, as he explains in the table 
of contents, to the progressive apprenticeship of a Taoist priest. The first section, 
based on Jia Shanxiang’s Gaodao zhuan iKjMfil (written between 1086-1101), is 
composed of sixteen biographies of grand masters, who were to serve as models. The 
following sections provide the texts, hymns, prayers, introductions, and conclusions 
of the various rituals, including those of the “exterior altar” ( waitanfashi j\- 1® Ip ; 

6.2a). The latter ritual seems to derive from Chao Guan JifS (5.8a; cf. 2.23a). The 
rituals for bathing and nourishing the souls of the deceased (5.i9a-32b) are close to 
those of Jiang Shuyu (so 8 Wushang huanglu dazhai licheng yi 26.8a-i7b), though 
Lii’s text prescribes a series of offerings — of incense, flowers, etc. (5.25a-28a)— that 
Jiang ascribes to “vulgar rituals” (26.17b). 

The last three sections concern the work of the chief cantor ( dujiang fPaS) and 
the grand master (gaogong fashi )• Comparison of the text with the table of 

contents leads to the conclusion that of the first of these three sections only the intro- 
duction has survived. It is an abridged and annotated quotation of Du Guangting’s 
Zandaoyi iff fit (see 507 Taishang huanglu zbaiyi 53.ia-3a). Lii Taigu’s discussion of the 
opening rites (6.3a-4a) is based on works by Du Guangting, Yang Jie fj§f^ ( jinshi 
(It i 1059), and “Sun the teacher,” that is. Sun Xubo S ■ For his Consecration of 
the Altar (chitan jf&ifi), Lii uses works by Du, Yang, and Zhang Shangying. 

Juan 8 gives the texts of introduction for the nine recitations of sacred texts during 
a three-day Yellow Register Retreat (the cycle of recitations is the same as that in 1224 
Daomen dingzhi 5.ia-ioa). The explanation of the visualizations performed by t\\t gao- 
gong fashi during the various rites is close to that of Jiang Shuyu (juan 32 and 34), 
but it is far less complete. Of particular interest is the acknowledgment of the role of 
the Tianxin zhengfa ddLiE'{£ movement in the development of the new ritual of 
Announcement ( fazou 9.1a). The authority of the Taoist master Zhao Mingju 

Ejfj |1 is invoked on two occasions (9.7b, 13a; cf. 3.4a). The reader is referred to Sun 




[ ioi 4 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



Xubo Mlm& for further information regarding the expedition of petitions to Heaven 
(9.16a). 

John Lagerwey 

Wushang huanglu dazhai lichen g yi -h ft $1 ^ 3L ffc fi§ 

57 juan 

By Jiang Shuyu postfaces by Jiang Xi and Jiang Yan Mffi. 

(dated 1223), and by Gao Wenhu 

508 (fasc. 278-290) 

“Standardized Rituals of the Supreme Yellow Register Retreat.” The term huanglu 
(Yellow Register) in the tide refers essentially, in Jiang Shuyu’s book, to the 
ritual for the salvation of the dead (3.1b). The postfaces provide biographies of the 
author by his two sons (57.ia-4-b; dated 1223) and of the author’s master, Liu Yong- 
guang by Gao Wenhu ( jinshi J§± 1160; 57.4b-9a). In addition to other administra- 
tive titles, Gao signs his text as the intendant (tiju IS IjS ) of die Taiping xingguo gone 

*¥®H^onLushanjiai. 

Although the author of the manual as a whole is clearly Jiang Shuyu, each 
chapter carries an individual signature that must be taken into account. Thus juan 
19 and 20 are attributed to Du Guangting alone; juan 25-31 (all the rituals of the 
Great Method) and 41-43 (the majority of the fu used in the rituals) are signed only 
by Jiang himself; juan 16, the suqi ritual, is described as “written by Lu Xiujing, 
augmented and corrected by Zhang Wanfu, collated and fixed by Li Jingqi, transmit- 
ted by Liu Yongguang, and compiled by Jiang Shuyu.” Almost all other chapters are 
said to have been “transmitted by Liu Yongguang and written by Jiang Shuyu.” Juan 
51-56 are not signed separately. 

Of the above-mentioned masters, Li Jingqi $ H iff alone is unknown elsewhere 
(he is mentioned three times in the manual: 16.12b, 17.28b, 18.5a). Liu Yongguang 
(1134-1206; see 32.5b), a disciple of Cai Yuanjiu MftX on Longhu shan hIj^LU, 
studied primarily Zhengyi ritual and the methods of the Five Thunders of the Office of 
Jade (Yujuwuleifa jEJft ElUii ). Summoned to the capital by the emperor Xiaozong 
(r. 1163-1189), he was appointed head of the Taoists of the capital ( zuoyoujie daolu tr. 

in 1203. He celebrated many a retreat of the Yellow Register in the Jiangzhe 
'/I (fff area, and he is even said to have compiled a Huanglu keyi ft H f 4 fit (see Longhu 
shan zhi , by Lou Jinyuan, 7.63.-73., and 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa 55.25a). 
According to the Longhu shan zhi , Liu was also an adept of the Tianxin methods T('L' 
S, which he is said to have received at the same time as those of the Five Thunders 
from a mysterious Taoist named Zhang Fuyuan 3S$$7t;. Some people identified the 
latter as Zhang Daoling xM l^t . The monograph also makes Liu the founder of a 

Ziwei sect on Longhu shan. 



3. B. 3 Lingbao [ 101s ] 



Jiang Shuyu (1162-1223; for Jiading 10, 57.2b, read Jiadingi6: see “Cunzhai Jiang 
Yiyang muzhi ming {f M I* ,” in Huanchuanji 10.11b, and “Jiang zhixian 

muzhi ming in Helinji 35.12a) was a local mandarin whose highest 

office was prefect of Yiyang xian in Xinzhou fH jj'[ , near Longhu shan. He was 

also a Taoist initiate, and the names of his three masters— Zhan Qigu SWS, Tian 
Jushi EB/gjff (b. 1074), and Liu Yongguang— are given in the manual (35.12a). He 
is said to have met his initiating master (dushi Hffjfjj), Liu, for the first time in 1195 in 
Guacang J t§ H ; he later visited Liu on Longhu shan in 1199 and again in 1202. Dur- 
ing this last encounter, Liu is said to have transmitted to Jiang all that he had himself 
received from the fangshi Jj it of Jing jf?j and Shu Hj and to have encouraged him 
to “emend” the work of Tian Jushi (57.3a-b). Jiang’s sacerdotal title, Taishang zhifa 
xianshi is mentioned in 219 Shangjing dafa 28.3a. 

According to his sons, Jiang Shuyu worked on his manual for some twenty 
years. The result of his labors was a Huanglu zhaiyi jf Illlffii in thirty-six juan, a 
Ziran zhaiyi in fifteen, and a Duren xiuzhai xingxiang songjing yi 

fT If sfl I?. fH in twenty-four. Together, these seventy- five juan were titled Lingbao 
yujian fi Jp 5 $5? (57.4a). The present manual would appear to represent only the first 
of these three works (cf. 1.3b). While the manual seems to be complete, it is likely that 
juan 51-57 consist of additions to the original. 

Remarkable for the clarity of its organization, Jiang’s manual provides all the texts, 
drawings, and explanations necessary for the performance of a three-day retreat of the 
Yellow Register. Frequent, in-depth discussions of individual rites and their correct 
form ( zhengfa lE'/£; 26.3a) also add much to the interest of Jiang’s text. (See figs. 
43-45) 

For Jiang, the retreat of the Yellow Register is, in the first place, the scriptural and 
liturgical tradition defined by Lu Xiujing : the list of thirty-six canonical works given 
at 1 .5a-7a contains only one title —Dongxuan lingbao daoyin sanguang miaojing M fj ft 
S? 3 1 H (cf. 39 Taishang daoyin sanguang jiubian miaojing) — that does not 

derive from the “old Lingbao” canon associated with Lu’s name (note, however, that 
in the body of the manual [i2.2a-b] recitation of the following texts is envisaged: 19 
Taishang shengxuan xiaozai burning miaojing , 374 Taishang dongxuan lingbao jiuku miao- 
jing, 181 Taishang jiuzhen miaojiejinlu duming bazui miaojing , and 24 Tuanshi tianzun 
shuo shengtian dedao jing). 

After Lu Xiujing, Jiang recognizes Zhang Wanfu and Du Guangting — 
especially the latter (see 2i.i3b-i7b, 33.2a-b, 7b-iob)— as the chief representatives of 
the orthodox tradition. In the Meditation Hall (Jingmo tang If Mft'g!), these three 
patriarchs are therefore remembered by means of special “masters’ emplacements” 
(shiwei UijifiZ; 38.20b). 

If for Jiang the Lingbao scriptures and rituals are the main focus of the tradition, 





\ /: i »•* rt’JTS # W ~l <J -¥ 4* 




$*'jf i + *-*-z*-iiitKTk'i'i 

«&U*£iiUSi 



>a\ ; 



figure 43. Diagrams for the construction of the altar ( so 8 2.2a, 4a-b). Ming reprint of 1598. 
Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/504) 




figure 44. Emissaries conveying memorials to Heaven, with spirit guides ( so 8 39.i6b-i7a). Ming 
reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/504) 




figure 45. True map of the Fengdu underworld, for 
use in the rites of salvation (so 8 40.5b). Ming reprint 
of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de 
France. (Chinois 9546/504) 



3 .B .3 Lingbao [ 1017 ] 

the method of dispatching petitions ( zhang J|r ) to Heaven is Zhengyi (9.5b, 10.9b, 
etc.). The Zhengyi initiation— the Sanwu dugong lu and the Zhengyi 

mengwei luJE — ’ H HE it — is also a prerequisite for the “exteriorization of the officials” 
( chuguan ft) IK ) performed during the first of the nine Audience rituals (xingdao fj 
jjt ; cf. i7.3b-8a and 49.9a). In order to qualify for celebrating a Retreat of the Yellow 
Register, a grand master (gaogong j ®5 ) must have received the two Zhengyi registers 

and the Lingbao canon and register ( Lingbao zhongmeng wufa lu if If 
and he or she must have already participated in a ritual of the Great Lingbao Method 
( Lingbao dafa M'lf^;(£). 

Champion of an orthodoxy, Jiang is extremely critical of those who, like Zhang 
Ruohai ^ir $? , author of 1280 Xuantan kanwu lun, do not respect the old ways (gufa 
^ /£ ; see especially juan 16). He also addresses the proliferation offii, contracts, mudrd, 
and rituals that had occurred “ever since the Great Lingbao Method was revealed” 
(33.na). Jiang reduces the use of ffi to the strict minimum. He frequendy complains 
of contemporary practices (shike iS| 4 ; 28.i4a-i5a, 39.16a) and texts (43.12b). In one 
case, however— that of two fu representing dragon-messengers— he feels obliged to 
accept such practices in spite of his reservations concerning their legitimacy: “Masters 
of the world ( shishi tftlJfjj ) have been transmitting and using them for so long that I 
should not venture to reject them” (40.1b). 

Among contemporary forms of Taoism that do find favor in Jiang’s eyes are the 
Shenxiao and Zhongxiao movements: the chief divinity of the former 
Changsheng dijun Jilt'S? If and the legendary founder of the latter Shengong 
miaoji zhenjun ^ Rif arc both invited to the Offering (38.13a, 8b). Lu Shi- 
zhong and his yutang Ti'il methods are mentioned several times without repro- 
bation (15.5b, 39.13a), as is the Tianxin zhengfa (14.16a, 49.5b). The seals 

of authority whose use Jiang condones reflect the same diversity, for they represent 
heavenly offices of Lingbao, Zhengyi, Tianxin, Shenxiao, and Zhongxiao origin (see 
43.iob-i2b). 

Beyond these references it is not easy to identify the sources of Jiang’s ritual prac- 
tice. For the two fu mentioned above, he relies on a certain Lin Huffing #HiI ; for 
the Yellow Register of Immortality (Changsheng duming hmnglu np MM), he 

prefers Cai Zhixu’s version, deeming it more precise than the Yutang texts and 

more complete than the Ziying lingshu H B UJ (41 . ioa-i6a; cf. 466 Lingbao lingjiao 

jidujinshu 260). But for the construction of the altar for the wheel-lanterns ( lundeng fm 
J§ ), he prefers his “own method” to that proposed by Cai Zhixu and Lu Shizhong 

( 39 .i 2 b-i 3 b). 

Jiang subscribes to the Tiantai T: a theory of the Five Translations (47.9a; cf. article 
on 1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa). Some of his fu seem to be of Shenxiao provenance 
(cf. 4i.i8b-i9a and 42.2a-3b to 1219 Gaoshang shenxiao yuqing zhenwang zishu dafa 





[ ioiS ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1 019 ] 



n.38b-39a and n.na-ija, respectively; also 40.na-i9a and to 147 Lingbao wuliang du- 
ren shangpin miaojingfutu 2.9b-i7b). The rite of the Five Offices (Wuju shi EE ^), 
the core rite in the ritual of the same name (29.sb-i6a, especially 12a; cf. 219 Lingbao 
wuliang duren shangjing dafa 40.16a), corresponds to the method of the Five Offices 
described by Jin Yunzhong in his postface (dated 1225) to theTongchu Mf) rev- 
elations (1220 Daofa huiyuan I78.3a-6a). The postface of Lu Yuanlao lM lifs, which 
follows that of Jin (i78.6a-8a), provides a discussion of seals very much like that of 
Jiang. 

The Tongchu revelations are followed in 1220 Daofa huiyuan by nine juan (179-187) 
concerning the Flying Walk on the Nine Powers (Jiuling feibu /l M ff$ J ) ) used in 
presenting petitions. The 1220 Daofa huiyuan provides a more complete version of the 
Zhengyi shuzhang pin menxia keling IE — ItJ :§£ na H T 14 t? cited by J 1 an g S h uyu in 
the present text (the passage io.6a-9a corresponds to 1220 Daofa huiyuan i8o.ia-3b). 
The beginning of the relevant ritual is identical in both texts (22.ib-2a corresponds to 
1220 Daofa huiyuan i84.ia-2a). 

In conclusion, we may note that Jiang seems to call for the use of 407 Lingbao dalian 
neizhi xingchi jiyao (24.11a) and that two paragraphs attributed to the Master in the 
Beyond ( xuanshi % ® ) are taken from 219 Shangjing dafa (39.na-i3b corresponds to 
219 Shangjing dafa 50.8b-9b, 5i.ia-2a). 

John Lagerwey 

Lingbao yujian mulu 

31 fols. 

Table of contents for S4-7 Lingbao yujian 

546 (fasc. 302) 

Lingbao yujian M If 31 

43 juan 

547 (fasc. 302-311) 

“Jade Mirror of the Numinous Treasure.” The tide of this manual may originally 
have designated a practice of the Great Lingbao Method whose aim was to cause 
spirits to appear in a mirror (see 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa I4.i3a-b). 
Bo Yuchan mentions a text of this name, but it is not clear whether he is referring to 
the present manual (cf. 1307 Haiqiong Bo zhenrenyulu 2.6b with 4.i2a-b of the present 
work). Yet another text of this name, in ten juan, is attributed to Wu Quanjie (see 
Longhu shan zhi, by Lou Jinyuan, 7.15b). 

In its present form, this manual is incomplete: a section on rituals (“Kefan men 
f 4 fflSP!”), mentioned twice in the text (33.4b, 34.17b), is missing. It is also extremely 
difficult to determine the manual’s date: it has many passages in common with other 



Great Lingbao Method texts, but only rarely is it possible to demonstrate that bor- 
rowing has occurred. Two cases, however, seem fairly clear. First, 30.i5b-i8a is parallel 
to 1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa 34-3a-7a (two notes, at 30.16a and 34.3b, respectively, 
seem to refer to other sections in the text, but those sections are actually in 1221 Lingbao 
dafa , not in the Lingbao yujian). Second, 14.9b would appear to be an abbreviation 
of 1221 Lingbao dafa 32.3b-4a: the author of the latter text leaves to a “future erudite” 
the task of deciding between his version ( benfa 44£) of the lamp altars ( dengtan ffl 
iff ) and that of the Golden Register (jinlu ^IK); the author of the Lingbao yujian 
eliminates the variant version. He seems also to have deleted the name of J ian gShu- 
yu’s master, Tian Jushi tti /gf If , mentioned in the Lingbao dafa text. Despite these two 
cases, however, in the vast majority of parallel passages the variants are so numerous 
as to suggest two different textual traditions (cf., e.g., S47 Lingbao yujian 9.i8a-2ia, 
i3.2oa-22b, and 36.i7b-2ib, with 1221 Lingbao dafa 37.i5a-i8a, 33.ia-2a, i3.7a-8a, and 
43.i7b-2oa). 

The relationship of the Lingbao yujian with other Great Lingbao Method texts is 
equally difficult to determine. For example, i8.5b-6b is parallel to so8 Wushang huang- 
lu dazhai lichengyi io.9b-iob and to 219 Shangjing dafa 41.8a. However, 219 Shangjing 
dafa , though older than 308 Lichengyi, gives a shortened version of what is to be found 
in the latter text and in S47 Lingbao yujian . Moreover, the lines at i8.6b6-io are unique 
to the present text, and for zhepo f/f ® at i8.6a3 , 219 Shangjing dafa 4i.8a6 and 508 Li- 
chengyi io.9bio have choupo M®. Also, 308 Lichengyi mentions— in notes at 10.10a, 
10b— a Taoist at Huizong’s (r. 1100-1125) court by the name of Cai Zhixu and 

Jiang Shuyu’s own master, Liu Chongjing W 'M 5 4 t • The first note may be found in 
S47 Lingbao yujian 18. 6a, but the second note is lacking there. 

Other examples of the difficulties abound. The text at i8.9a-b seems to be more 
complete than the parallel version in 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 23.32.-64, as does 
i8.9b-ioa by comparison with so8 Lichengyi n.6a. The passage at i8.i2b-i6a is paral- 
lel to 308 Lichengyi io.6a-9a and to 1220 Daofa huiyuan i8o.ia-4b: 347 Lingbao yujian 
and 1220 Daofa huiyuan both have forty-five rules, in contrast with the thirty-six of 308 
Licheng yi, but the thirty-six rules that are common to all three texts show clearly that 
308 Licheng yi and 347 Lingbao yujian derive from the same textual tradition, while 219 
Shangqing dafa follows a different source. 

As a final example, we may compare 347 Lingbao yujian 7.62-72 with 219 Shangqing 
dafa 53.i8a-i9a and 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu 266.7a-8a. The fu in 347 Lingbao 
yujian are closer to those in 466 Jidu jinshu than to those in 219 Shangqing dafa, but for 
the accompanying prayers (7.7a, J3.i9a-b, 278.13a, respectively), the texts of 466 Jidu 
jinshu and 219 Shangqing dafa are identical, with the exception of the first two words 
and the last line. The first two words in 219 Shangqing dafa are the same as those in 347 
Lingbao yujian, but for the rest of the prayer the latter text is quite different. 




[ iozo ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1021 ] 



In short, if the first two cases treated above seemed to show that the present text 
was compiled after the 1221 Lingbao dafa of Wang Qizhen R, all the other cases 
show that the present version not infrequendy represents a textual tradition that is 
even older than that of 219 Shangqing dafa. In that regard, we may note that #7 Lingbao 
yujian uses the title Lingbao duren shangjing dafa SSffiAJl$?Ai£ to refer not to 
219 Shangqmg dafa but to the Great Method of Salvation in general. It is also worth 
noting that the only Great Lingbao Method master mentioned in S47 Lingbao yujian 
is Tian Ziji EH (Tian Lingxu EBSlli; sec 1220 Daofa huiyuan 244.2a), whom it 
refers to as the ancestral master (zushi Jl&ti ; 1.11a). 

The present manual also draws on the Tianxin zhengfa A A' IF. A and Yutang dafa 
iii'AA traditions. Lu Shizhong is mentioned beside Ge Xuan, Sa zhenren 
j£| lH A (probably referring to Sa Shouzhen (£1 Rf R ; see 1220 Daofa huiyuan 242.1a 
and Longhu shan zhi 7.3b), and “all the ancestral founders through the generations” 
(1.6b). The register of immortality used in this manual {s47 Lingbao yujian 27.ia-5b), 
although it resembles those in the other texts (e.g., 466 Jidujinshu 290.ioa-i3a, 1221 
Lingbao dafa 48.i5a-i9b; cf. so8 Lichengyi 4i.ioa-i5b), is the only one that belongs to 
the Golden rather than to the Yellow Register. According to 308 Lichengyi 41.16a, the 
Golden Register version is of Yutang dafa origin. 

The author of S47 Lingbao yujian distinguishes, as is customary, the Lingbao ritual 
tradition that he follows from what he calls the Zhengyi tianxin IE— A A' tradition 
(1.11a). At the same time, however, he proposes a method for sending petitions to 
Heaven that is common to sandong daoshi H j| 5 j jM i and jijiuxuezi A (18. ib). 

In juan 17-18 he cites Zhengyi texts frequently (much of the content of juan 17-18 and 
21 is also in 1220 Daofa huiyuan 179-87), and in juan 7 he uses Tianxin A A' methods 
of exorcism (cf. 7.isa-23b and $66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa i.2a-4a, 2.3b, 5.2b-3a, 
6.6b-7a, nb-i2a). 

The final fu in this last Tianxin sequence, as well as the accompanying prayer, is at- 
tributed in both S47 Lingbao yujian and s66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa to the Shenxiao 
ff Method. The fu and a part of the prayer are indeed to be found in 1219 Gaoshang 
shenxiao yuqing zhenwang zishu dafa 10.36a. Among the many traces of Shenxiao influ- 
ence in the manual (3.11b, 8.8b, 13.38a, 41.16a), one of the most interesting is the poem 
at 43.i7b-i8a, which is parallel to 147 Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing futu 
3.i8b-i9b: although the variants are too numerous to suggest borrowing, the poem is 
important in that it is a veritable summary of liandu ® rites. 

In short, the present work, when compared with other manuals of the same school, 
provides unique, sometimes original versions of Great Lingbao Method practices. 
It is for that reason a most precious work, all the more so in that it contains— espe- 
cially in juan 1 and at the beginning of each section, but also scattered throughout 
the text— short essays and explanatory notes of admirable concision and clarity. As 



an example, we may take the following sentence at 29.8a: “The five spirits are all like 
the Fangxiang shi A IS A : they have the appearance of spirits who open the way (to 
souls imprisoned in hell), and each wears clothing the color of which corresponds to 
a direction.” 

John Lagerwey 

Shangqing lingbao dafa _h iff M 'W A A 

1 + 66 juan 

Compiled by Wang Qizhen A ^ R ; transmitted by Ning Quanzhen 'A’AR 

(1101-1181) 

1221 (fasc. 942-962) 

“Great Rites of the Shangqing Lingbao.” This manual may owe its title to the de- 
sire of its compiler to challenge the preeminence of a rival, Jin Yunzhong, author 
of 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa. Of Wang Qizhen, unfortunately, we know nothing, 
except that his name, ending with the character for “truth” ( zhen [jR ), is typical of the 
lineage founded by Ning Quanzhen (see the list in 1220 Daofa huiyuan 244.ia-2b). 
Perhaps he can be identified with the Wang Qizhen mentioned in Chongding Tiantai 
shan fangwai zhiyao 7.10a and called there “Little Lingbao” to distinguish him from his 
elder brother, Wang Maoduan A ASA known as “Big Lingbao.” This Wang Qizhen 
is said to have been the author of a Lingbao jiaofa bilu fllf $k lilAH in ten juan that 
was kept at the Tongbo guan fllUQSI temple on Mount Tiantai Ap - The Fangwai 
zhiyao states that both brothers were adepts of the Shangqing dadongfa A 7ft A PI iA • 
However, another reference to Wang Maoduan (4.1a) places him in the time of the 
emperor Huizong (r. 1100-1125), which would make him a contemporary of Ning 
Quanzhen and render the attribution of the present manual to his younger brother 
unlikely. Nevertheless, this manual clearly represents the Lingbao tradition ofTiantai, 
and it may be that its compiler was, or considered himself to be, an heir to the tradition 
of the Tongbo guan master. 

An extensive list of the “masters of the sea” may be found at 54.3a. It includes the 
names of such famous masters of antiquity 3sGeXuan,GeHong, and LuXiujing, 
as well as those of many Shangqing masters of the Tang and Song dynasties ( Pan S h 1 - 
zheng, Sima Chengzhen, Li Hanguang, Zhu Ziying, Mao Fengrou 
A, Liu Hunkang). Several of the masters in the same register with, and presumably 
of the same generation as, Liu Hunkang have names ending with zhen: Zhao Qi- 
zhen i§ ^ R , Zhang Dazhen JJIil! R , Hu Shouzhen R- Nothing is known about 
these three masters or those in the last two registers. The list, however, does give an 
indication of how the Lingbao school of Mount Tiantai perceived its own lineage. 

Internal evidence suggests a relatively late date for Wang Qizhen’s manual. In the 
first place, Wang cites explicitly the so8 Wushang huanglu dazhai licheng yi of Jiang 




[ 1022 ] 3 .B .3 Lingbao 



3 .B .3 Lingbao [ 1023 ] 



Shuyu (56.4a, paraphrasing a note at 508 Lichengyi 32.2a). In fact, the phrase in ques- 
tion is embedded in a passage that is common to both Shangqing lingbao dafa ( 1221 
Dafa 56.3b-4b and 1223 Dafa 2i.4a-sb) and poses, thereby, the problem of the relation- 
ship between the two manuals. Parallel or identical passages are found in twenty-six of 
the forty-four juan of Jin’s text and in thirty-one of the sixty-six juan of Wang’s. 

Some of these passages give the impression that Jin abridges Wang (cf. 1223 Dafa 
i.ia-b, 2b-3b, 4a-b with 1221 Dafa 8.iob-i2a, i.2a-6b, 7a-8b, respectively). This im- 
pression is reinforced by the fact that virtually every one of Jin Yunzhong’s tirades 
against the Lingbao tradition ofTiantai corresponds to a passage in Wang’s manual: 
for example, the names of the bawei Alt that Jin ascribes to the Tiantai tradition 
(4.ia-b) correspond to techniques described in 1221 Dafa 3.222-2^9. Jin’s citation of the 
twenty-fifth section of the Tiantai manual (8.2b~3a) is found at 1221 Dafa 4.2bs, 3b6, 
8, 7, 9-4a2. Jin criticizes (43.18b) the use— prescribed in 1221 Dafa 29.i6b-i9b— of ten 
yellow flags for announcing the Oath of Transmission to the Heavenly Worthy of the 
Ten Directions. 

Such examples could be multiplied. Jin’s juan 8 alone contains a dozen instances. 
Of the forty-nine sections of the original Tiantai manual (see the article on 466 Lingbao 
lingjiao jidu jinshu), Jin mentions explicitly twenty-one, most of which he cites, and 
of these there are only two of which 1221 Dafa contains no trace. There can, therefore, 
be no doubt concerning the links of Wang’s manual with the Tiantai tradition. 

That said, Jin’s citations and references are not based on Wang’s text, as can be seen 
from the following analysis of the first three common passages mentioned above, also 
found in 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa : 

1. 1221 Dafa 8.iob-i2a corresponds to 219 Dafa, 8.5b-7b; Jin (i.2a-b) states 
that he abridges an “old version.” 

2. 1221 Dafa 1.22-72 corresponds to 219 Dafa i.ia-6a; Jin eliminates the eighth 
“elucidation,” common to 219 Dafa and 1221 Dafa. 

3. 1221 Dafa 1.72-92 corresponds to 219 Dafa, 2.ia-2b; Jin eliminates the fourth 
“translation,” common to 219 Dafa and 1221 Dafa. 

At the same time, however, a scribal error common to 219 Dafa and 1223 Dafa ( nei 
A at 2.ib6 and i.4a6, respectively) is read correctly (xi ) at 1221 Dafa i.7bio. 

Close examination of other passages shared by the three manuals shows that the 
two Shangqing lingbao dafa rely, albeit independently, on 219 Dafa or its source (cf., 
especially, 219 Dafa 54.15b, 1221 Dafa 45.24a-b, and 1223 Dafa 32.4b-5a) and that they 
also have direct links to each other (cf. 219 Dafa 55.ib8-2a6, 1221 Dafa 45.9b7-ioa2, and 
1223 Dafa 32.6a7-b3). In the latter passages, 1221 Dafa agrees seven times with 219 Dafa 
against 1223 Dafa; 1223 Dafa agrees two times with 219 Dafa against 1221 Dafa, and 1221 
Dafa agrees six times with 1223 Dafa against 219 Dafa. 



What, then, is the relationship between the manuals of Jin Yunzhong and Wang 
Qizhen? The response is to be found in the attitude of the latter toward the Tiantai 
tradition criticized by Jin: Wang uses that tradition but never mentions its origin. 
Each time Jin refers explicitly to the practices ofTiantai in a passage shared by the two 
manuals, that part of the phrase is either lacking altogether in Wang’s text or replaced 
by “it is said that ...” (cf. 1223 Dafa 4.i3a4-7, i4a2-4, 9; 5.332, 4bi, with 1221 Dafa 
io.3b8-io, 5b5-7, 4a7, 44bi, 45^2). In one long parallel passage ( 1223 Dafa io.5b-iob; 
1221 Dafa 27.i7a-2oa) the following lines are missing in 1221 Dafa: 6aio-b3 (mentions 
Tiantai); 6b5-6 (mentions Tiantai); 7a8-io (deng ^ [etcetera] replaces, in 1221 Dafa; a 
list of seals in 1223 Dafa) ; 7b4-8a7 (criticizes Shenxiao elements adopted in the Tiantai 
movement); 9a6-b6 (criticizes the vulgar practices ofTiantai). The most striking of 
these examples concerns the use of seals: before abridging the list of criticized seals 
with the word deng, Wang mentions three of them (27.i8bi-2), the use of which he 
had earlier condoned (27.i4a-b). Such incoherences allow us to conclude that Wang’s 
manual is posterior to Jin’s. 

That being the case, the suppression of all reference to the very Tiantai school from 
which so much of his text derives must be attributed to the compiler’s desire to dis- 
tance himself from a discredited local tradition, which is no doubt also the explanation 
for his replacement of the phrase “the Master in the Beyond says” with “the Master 
says,” in passages taken from the 219 Dafa or its source: Jin Yunzhong criticizes 
the former phrase as yet one more instance ofTiantai inanity (5.3a). The author of 1221 
Dafa repeats Jin’s criticism, but eliminates Jin’s name at the beginning of the note 
(io.44a-b). 

The list of passages common to 219 Dafa and Wang’s manual involves one of 
two prefaces and forty-six of the first fifty-three juan of 1221 Dafa. The content of 
these chapters, divided into twenty-four sections ( men PJ), may be summarized as 
follows: 

• Juan 1: theoretical introduction to the Great Method 

• Juan 2-4: basic practices of the Tiantai tradition (ten of the twenty-one 
sections of the Tiantai sishijiu pin AA HA Atm mentioned by Jin are found 
in these three juan) 

• Juan 5: recitation of scripture and the audience rites performed inside the body 

• Juan 6-7: exorcistic practices and rites of healing using fu 

• Juan 8: liturgical calendar, rules, and taboos 

• Juan 9: rules for entering and leaving the oratory; ritual of confession 

• Juan 10: description of the pantheon and the structure of the universe of the 
stars, the heavens, and the earths 

• Juan 11 : fu and incantations for summoning beneficent powers 







[ 1024 ] 3 .B .3 Lingbao 

• Juan 12-26: exorcistic practices and the accumulation of merit, mosdy based 
on the use of the Duren jing 15 All 

• Juan 27: the sacerdotal hierarchy; seals of authority 

• Juan 28-30: documents and ritual of transmission 

• Juan 31-34: full description of the preparadons for a Retreat (altar, flags, 
lamps, fu, etc.) 

• Juan 35-38: fu, incantations, and techniques used for summoning souls of the 
deceased (the ritual of the Divine Tiger) 

• Juan 39-48: fu and incantations used in the various rituals of the Yellow 
Register Retreat 

• Juan 49-53: description of the altar, fu and incantations for the Sublimation 
ritual. 

The preface shared by 219 Dafa and 1221 Dafa— called “celestial preface” in the latter 
(preface, 3b-6b), attributed to Tianzhen huangren A Jl A in the former— describes 
the ritual practice of the Taoist in alchemical terms. In Wang’s manual it is preceded 
by an “old preface” that situates the revelation of the many techniques of salvation in 
the context of the increasing decadence of the universe since the end of the Longhan 
era. Its author vaunts the merits of the Yellow Register Retreat, which he says can be 
celebrated for both the living and the dead, for both ordinary people and the emperor, 
and by either male or female Taoists. 

Juan 54-59 give the “traditional explanation” of the rituals of the retreat. These juan 
contain many parallel passages with Jin Yunzhong’s work and with that of Jiang 
Shuyu. The latter is also the sole source of parallels for the seven juan of documents 
at the end of the present text. 

John Lagerwey 

Shangqing lingbao dafa mulu Jl i n Si I? A A H 1 $ 

11 +22 fols. 

Table of contents for 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 

1222 (fasc. 963) 

Shangqing lingbao dafa h fit M A A 

44 juan 

By Jin Yunzhong (A- 1225) 

1223 (fasc. 963-972) 

“Great Lingbao Method of the Shangqing Heaven.” The title designates the textual 
and ritual traditions that Jin Yunzhong set out to synthesize and for which he 
wished to provide the orthodox definition (see the documents of transmission, 42.15b; 
cf. 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa 71.32b). The term Lingbao dafa fa If A A 



3 .B .3 Lingbao [ 102s ] 

is a reminder that the methods of the school of that name were developed on the basis 
of the Lingbao canon (see preface, 2a) ; Shangqing is the heaven from which this canon 
derives in the traditional scheme of the Three Caverns. The fundamental importance 
of the Duren jing in this movement explains why the name Duren dafa 
(Great Method of Salvation) is sometimes used to refer to its practices (preface, 3a). 

According to Jin Yunzhong’s introduction to the Tongchu mID revelations 
( 1220 Daofa huiyuan i78.3a-6a), the names of his masters were Gao Jingxiu jfiHflf?; 
Tang Keshou It , zi Daomin jff Iff ; and Liu Hunpu j§[j M th , zi Fuguan glj H . As 

with die author, we know of these three generations of masters only what Jin tells us. 
At the beginning of the Shaoxing era (1131), Gao Jingxiu, who had fled the northern 
capital and sought refuge in the south, began to work ( huaxing It ft) in the region 
between the rivers Jiang '/I and Huai (17.22b). His version of the Shangqing lingbao 
dafa, according to Jin, was based on “ancient books” transmitted without interruption 
since the end of the Tang. In the petitions Gao sent to Heaven, he identified himself 
as “Gao, of the Ziyuan an ^ftfi I, in the county of Qimen Iff PI, Huizhou jfpJ'H” (in 
Shexian Anhui; 23.15b). He spent his last years in the same county, at Xinan #r 
$ (17.22b). 

Of Tang Keshou, Jin says that he was a Taoist from Chuzhou fM ; J'H , Zhejiang, and 
that he practiced exclusively the method of the Five Offices ( wujufa fi/ffiA), that is, 
the method of Tongchu (1220 Daofa huiyuan 178.3b). Tang transmitted the Tongchu 
material to Liu Hunpu, who also received initiation in the method of the Retreat 
(zhaifa fjf A) of Jiang Shuyu, whom Jin places in the Zhengyi tradition, and in 
the method of the nine visualizations for presenting petitions (jiusi zoufa fl if ) 
ofTian Jushi EUUlf (17.23b). 

Jin Yunzhong signs the undated preface of this manual with a title that derives 
in part from the Lingbao dafa tradition (cf. 219 Dafa 28.3b), but that also refers to his 
Tongchu attachments. His introduction to the Tongchu revelations is dated 1225. The 
present manual may well date from approximately the same period, as Jin states in the 
preface (8b) that “nearly 100 years have passed since the emigration to the south.” On 
the other hand, Jin states that Jiang Shuyu’s book, which in its present form dates 
to 1223, was already widely known (22.7a) and that four centuries had elapsed since Du 
Guan gti n g compiled his Huanglu zhai ff H fjf in forty juan (cf. 507 Taishang huang- 
lu zhaiyi). These remarks imply a much later date, between 1250 and 1300 (40.25b; cf. 
21.21b). Jin had already been a Taoist for two decades when he compiled his manual 
(21.20b). We may note here, too, that three passages, at 5.6b, 6.5b, and 28.3a, seem to 
have been added to the manual by another hand, probably a disciple. 

Jin explains his motivation in writing as follows: “I had the good fortune of not 
becoming a member of the sect of the heterodox and the counterfeiters, and I cannot 
bear the thought that future generations be deceived by them. I have followed with 



I 




[ 1026 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1027 ] 



reverence what my masters transmitted to me, adding only from my studies of other 
manuals that which was in harmony with the rituals of old. ... I am not one who has 
received a revelation from Heaven, it is true, but I take my responsibilities here below” 
(preface, 9a). 

Thus does Jin set the tone and reveal his intentions in the preface: in the name 
of the traditions of his masters he will denounce all latter-day inventions by those 
who, “in order to steal fame” (21.16a), go so far as to “truncate and alter the books of 
old and suppress traditional methods on the pretext that they are incomplete, but in 
reality in order that they may then produce novelties and sell their secrets for money 
to their disciples” (preface, 10a). Jin intends above all to use the “venerable books of 
the Central Plain” (12.5b) to halt the progress of the so-called “revelations of Tiantai” 
(preface, 3a-b) and the “customs of Zhe flff” (40.27b), referring to the regions of 
Zhexi (10.17a, 37.47b) and Zhcdong W\ M (13.24a, 20.8a, 21.9b, 22.7b), especially 
Tiantai fz n itself (preface, 8b, 14.12a, 43.18a). Ever since the appearance of the Tiantai 
sishijiupin ^ a H + tl net during the Shaoxing period (1131-1162; see preface, 3a), the 
partisans of this method, writes Jin, have been busily inventing seals, grades, and new 
rites (preface, 4b-sb, 6b-7a, juan 10, 12.6a). They even go so far as to don red turbans 
and thereby confound the exorcistic rites of vulgar sorcerers with rites based on the 
Duren jing & X.M. (6.i3a-i4b, 11.14a). Worse still, their esoteric explanations of Tao- 
ist ritual, and of the ritual for the presentation of petitions to Heaven in particular, 
represent a subjectivist, interiorist, and altogether dangerous interpretation of Taoist 
ritual (preface, 4a, 4.4b, 11a, 7.8a, 11a, 8.3a). 

It is fair to describe Jin’s manual as a manifesto against the Lingbao dafa of Tiantai, 
but in fact Jin’s criticism spares none. He deplores the egoism and individualism of 
the contemporary practice of the rites for the salvation of the dead, on the grounds 
that rituals of this kind were in reality pudu Hf , rituals of universal salvation (16.13a, 
17.22a, 23.8a, 24a, 35.10b). He attacks the vulgar verses used during the ritual for cross- 
ing the bridge (37.39a). Even the ritual masters for whom Jin says he has the highest 
esteem do not escape: Lin Lingsu was a “master of considerable accomplishments,” 
but he confused die Emperors of the Five Peaks with the Five Celestial Emperors who 
are die “roots of the Five Energies” (40.3b); Wang Shengqing j£ff* J®P wrote the best 
Lingbao dafa manual (preface, 2b-3a), but he did not know enough to eliminate all the 
heavenly offices added by the Tiantai school (5.4a), nor to differentiate the traditional 
Lingbao seal of authority from its Shenxiao version of the Xuanhe reign era 
(1119-1125; io.3b-4a); Lu Shizhong was “a man of great talent and vast erudition,” 
but that did not prevent him from elevating the Heavenly Master to the same rank as 
Shangdi (43.17b) nor, holding only a Zhengyi investiture, from jumping a rank 
and performing Lingbao rituals (10.19b); Jiang Shuyu, who went “even farther 
than Du Guangting in his research into the canonical rules” and who, therefore. 



“far surpasses his predecessors” (21.10b), nonetheless allowed himself to be influenced 
by the practices of Zhedong and so recommended visualizing a red rather than a yel- 
low vapor during the Noon Audience (2i.9b-na; cf. 22.7b, 40.27b). 

In this manner, Jin campaigns against modern decadence and its “latter-day 
techniques” (moshu ^ j$j; 4.4b). Jin recognizes only the three imperially sanctioned 
ordination centers: Longhu shan ntljtlh (Zhengyi), Gezao shan HS5 ft (JLf (Lingbao), 
and Sanmao shan HIF UJ (Dadong; 10. 8a). These three centers correspond to the lit- 
erature of the Three Caverns revealed in the distant past, for Jin identifies the Zhengyi 
movement with the Dongshen canon (25.ia-b; cf.i.5a, 22.16a, 4o.24a-b). Contrary to 
what the adepts of the Tiantai school affirm, writes Jin, only Zhengyi and Lingbao 
priests have the right to convey petitions to Heaven. He also criticizes J ian G Shuyu 
for writing that “the method of the retreat is of Lingbao origin, that of presenting 
petitions Zhengyi” (25.i9b-2oa). The true Zhengyi method, says Jin, was lost over 
the centuries, and the Tianxin zhengfa ^L'lEsfe movement that grew out of it goes 
back only to Tan Zixiao andRAO Dongtian (43.i6b-i7a). Only the Lingbao dafa 
has a tradition that goes back without interruption to the time of Ge Xuan and Xu 
Jingyang (Xu Xun; 43.18a). “The Lingbao way belongs specifically to the 

Dongxuan canon, but it is the synthesis of all that is essential in the Three Caverns 
and includes the mysteries of all the sacred books” (42.1a). 

The Lingbao ritual tradition, after having been revealed to Ge and Xu, was codi- 
fied by Lu Xiujing, Zhang Wanfu, and Du Guangting (19.3a). But it is Du 
Guangting’s rituals that, to Jin, represent the ultimate authority, for Du had access 
to the Daozang in the two national capitals when he compiled his Huanglu zbai in 
forty juan (40.25a-26a; Jin gives the table of contents of Du’s work in 39.ib-2b; cf. 
S07 Taishang huanglu zhaiyi). The Taoist canons compiled since Du, writes Jin— that 
of the end of the Five Dynasties (907-960) kept at the Tongbo guan temple 

on Mount Tiantai Ul (24.11a), that compiled by Wang Qinruo (962-1025; 
40.25b), or that compiled under the emperor Huizong (r. 1100-1125; 40.26a) —are all 
partial and contain extracanonical works. For all basic rituals— the Suqi the nine 

Audience rituals, and so on— Jin therefore refers the reader to Du Guangting’s 
work (40.28a). He also borrows from Du’s manual the major portion of his rituals for 
the Offering ( jiao H) and for Casting Dragons ( toulong J§f|; juan 40-41). Since the 
time of Du Guangting, however, there has been such a proliferation of rituals that 
it is “difficult to abolish them all in a single day” (19.1a). For example, neither the ritual 
of prior announcement ( yugao Jff ft ; 16. 6b, 19.11a) nor that of sublimation ( liandu 
(§; ; 17.19a) existed in Du Guangting’s time (Jin states, however, that the liandu al- 
ready existed as a form of individual practice in antiquity, and he cites Liu Hunkang 
as an authority; 37.1a). In a general way, the ritual texts of Du Guangting contained 
neither incantations nor documents of announcement (19.1b), for fu, documents. 




[ 1028 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 

incantations, and mudra were in the past all transmitted direcdy from master to dis- 
ciple (preface, ib-2a). 

Jin Yunzhong’s purpose, then, was to select such prescriptions from the many 
manuals of the Great Lingbao Method as were in conformity with the teaching of his 
masters (17.19b, 35.9b) and with “our method” (benfa A A; 19.1b, 43.20a). As men- 
tioned, Jin traces the Shangqing lingbao dafa of Gao Jingxiu to the end of the Tang: 
“For his methods he based himself on the Durenjing, and for the retreat he followed 
the rituals of Du Guangting” (i7.22b-23a). For certain novelties, nonetheless, Jin bent 
his own rules and recommended that which is “easy to practice” or “widely used” 
(13.22a). 

J in Yunzhong’s arguments are often accurate and always fascinating, but the vi- 
olence of his attacks on the Tiantai school are troubling: did he really borrow nothing 
from that school? “It is not the case that I did not originally receive the texts from my 
master and that I borrowed from the Tiantai method to make my book” (12.6a). Even 
if the Shangqing lingbao dafa of Wang Qizhen “borrowed” from Jin Yunzhong in 
a manner that may be described as dishonest (see 1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa), what 
was the origin of the “old texts” that Jin claims to have abridged when dealing with 
the “rules and commandments” (1.2a)? Was the theory of the Four Translations that 
Jin champions against the Five Translations of the Tiantai school as old as he asserts 
(1.4b)? 

Similar questions could be asked of Jin’s positions with respect to the Zhengyi 
movement. He states that the ritual for sending petitions and going before the em- 
peror originated with Ge Xuan and that the Lingbao methods of exorcism derive 
from the teachings that Xiaodao mingwang A ; i Bf\ A transmitted to Xu Jingyang 
(Xu Xun; 25.1b). Yet the history ofTaoist ritual suggests, rather, that both aspects of 
the Southern Song Lingbao synthesis owed a great deal to the Tianxin zhengfa move- 
ment that Jin dismisses as “recent.” 

John Lagenvey 

Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa 'M M IM A Jl $$. A A 

1 + 72 juan 

Ca. 1200 

219 (fasc. 85-99) 

“Great Rites of the Book of Universal Salvation.” The Book of Universal Salvation 
( Wuliang duren jing M JAA £? ) is the central scripture of the Lingbao canon . The 

Lingbao dafa SH! AA (Great Lingbao Method) is here described as the “way for 
saving souls from hell” (53.1a). More precisely, the very “heart of the Great Method” 
is composed of incantations, fu, and techniques (36.1a), the most important of which 
derive from an esoteric reading of the Durenjing AIM (see 3.i3b-9.7b, especially 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1029 ] 

juan 5-7, where the Durenjing is divided into four-character phrases in order to form 
fu capable of healing any illness and protecting the bearer in all circumstances). 

The preface is attributed to Tianzhen huangren A R ll A, who is said, accord- 
ing to the theory of the Five Translations (wuyi Elf), to have transcribed the huge, 
primordial characters of jade of which the Durenjing was originally composed into 
characters of human size and at the same time to have given them their “correct sound” 
(2.1b; cf. 97 Taishang lingbao zhutian neiyin ziranyuzi 3.ib-2a). Still later, the Tianzhen 
explained the basic Lingbao fu to the Yellow Emperor (2.1b, 72.8b; this story derives 
from 388 Taishang lingbao wufu xu 3.i7a-23b). 

The Duren dafa has also received the careful attention of a human editor: the text 
is divided into ninety sections ( pin nn), and all cross-references from one section 
to another (5.13b, 14.12b, 49.10b, etc.) seem to be accurate. The text also contains 
commentaries, some of which are attributed to [Tianzhen] Huangren (64.1a, 65.32a, 
69.26a), some to “the master” (53.1a, 63.1a, 65.7b), but most to the Master in the 
Beyond ( xuanshi AlW). This Master in the Beyond is at one point identified with 
a Tianzun (Xuanzhong da fashi Jinglao tianzun A A A A I? A A It ; 72.8b-9a), 
but he is also clearly designated as “my master” in a “note of the editor based on the 
instructions of the master” {jin’an shizhi g ; 55.i3a-b; cf. 43.2b, 8a, 55.1b, 63.2a). 

In short, this manual is the work of a disciple, perhaps a disciple of Ning Quanzhen 
(1101-1181). 

Our text is in any case closely linked to, but older than, 1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa , 
a manual “transmitted by Ning Quanzhen and compiled by Wang Qizhen R .” 
Most of the passages attributed here to the Master in the Beyond are also to be found 
in Wang’s manual (see the article on 1221 Shangqing lingbao daofa). Whether or not 
the Duren dafa is the source of these passages in the Wang text, both manuals clearly 
belong to the Tiantai tradition of the Great Method, for both subscribe to the above- 
mentioned theory of the Five Translations. 

The date of the Duren dafa may be set around 1200, for it contrasts the Lingbao 
method for writing two important fu with that of Liu Chongjing JJj A 5 ii (1134-1206), 
the master of Jiang Shuyu (1162-1223). Jiang seems, moreover, to cite this text (cf. 
the article on so8 Wushang huanglu dazhai lichengyi). The Duren dafa , finally, contains 
(juan 64) a ritual attributed to “Master Tian EH A A,” who is in all probability Tian 
Jushi EH /A 11 (b. 1074), the /fr/ti-master of Jiang Shuyu. 

The anonymous compiler of the Duren dafa clearly intended his manual to be a 
complete description of the Great Method. After first defining the cosmic founda- 
tions of the method (i.ia-2.2b), he describes its main practices (2.2b-25-9a), which 
prepare the adept to receive the Great Method directly from the Heavenly Worthy of 
Primordial Beginning (juan 26). The remaining chapters are largely given over to the 
ritual practice of the Taoist master. 




[ 1030 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 

During the preparatory phase, adepts learns to write and to use in their oratory the 
various fu of the school (juan 4-21); they also learn to absorb the essences of the pri- 
meval powers and to send petitions to Heaven (22.13-25. 3b). In addition to the Duren 
jing, two other early Lingbao texts play a major role in this period of apprenticeship: 
17.2b-18.16b corresponds to 97 Taishang lingbao zhutian neiyin ziran yuzi i.ib-i2b, 
I5b-2.i8b and i9.ia-na, 22.ia-6b corresponds to 352 Taishang Aongxuan lingbao chishu 
yujue miaojing 2.4b-2oa. Juan 21 is taken almost entirely from 1281 Wuyue zhenxing 
xulun. Several Shangqing texts concerning the absorption of the essences of the sun 
and the moon are also used, especially 639 Huangtian shangqing jinque dijun lingshu 
ziwen shangjing (4b-9b, 2a-3b correspond to 23.ia-6b in the Duren jing), but also 
33 Shangqing huangqi yangjing sandao shunxing jing (ia-b is the same as 22.6b-7a in 
the Duren jing). Next to these traditional elements we find much more recent ones: 
the letters of jade of the womb ( hunyuan yuzha ; juan 11-15), the grand 

methods of the Four Saints and of the Central Bushel (20.2b-nb), and Shenxiao di- 
vinities (io.8b-i2b; cf. i6.3a-8a and 147 Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing jutu 
2.3oa-32b). The new techniques have a single aim, namely, “to cause the pure yin to 
leave the body and the pure yang to fill it” for “that which is entirely yang is immortal, 
and that which is entirely yin is demonic” (9.8b, 8a). 

When apprenticeship is complete, adepts express their “great desire” for universal 
salvation: it is their intention to save all souls in hell, their own ancestors, and all 
the “living powers” of the heavens by a spiritual journey through the heavens to the 
dwelling place of the emperor (25-9a-b). The regular practice of this heavenly voyage 
gradually enables adepts’ yang-spirit to leave this “dusty world” permanently (25.10b) 
and so prepares them to receive the Great Method directly from the “ancestral mas- 
ter,” the Yuanshi tianzun (26.ia-3b). Having been thus initiated, adepts may practice 
rites of confession and petition before the Three Pure Ones (26.3b-8a), and then rites 
of absorption of the powerful qi that correspond to the “letters of jade” (26.8a-ioa). 
Adepts who have achieved mastery over the divinities of Heaven and Earth are hence- 
forth capable of “communicating with the zhenren and the spirits [ling ft ], of inhaling 
clouds and thunder and exhaling rain and lightning” (26.10a). 

Juan 27, which provides a complete ritual of confession, begins with the phrase, “to 
have few faults is the very essence of the practice of perfection.” Adepts must achieve 
merit in this world if they would become immortal, and even the method for the use 
of fu (Jufa ff '{f ), not to mention the petitions that adepts will present to Heaven “in 
order to save the living and the dead” will not be efficacious unless adepts first repent 
of their sins (27.1a). Juan 28.ia-9b gives the hierarchy of the immortals, that is, the 
various degrees of priestly rank; 28.9b-i5a gives the secret names of the Thirty-two 
Heavens, the Five Peaks, and so on; 29.ia-8b explains the structure of the heavens; 
29.8b-i5b describes the spirits who are in the service of the priest— including those of 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1031 ] 

the rite of Opening the Incense Burner ( falu fj£ ft! ) — and explains that the contract 
of immortality ( shengtian quan f-fj'ff) is a passport to Heaven that enables both the 
Taoist master to present his petitions and the “afflicted souls” to proceed to the Palace 
of the South. 

Once the master is thus assured of his power over all the forces of the universe, he 
undertakes his public ritual activity, for the living, in the first place, for whom he is 
essentially an exorcist (juan 30-45), but also for the dead (juan 4.7-71). He learns to 
perform the following ritual actions: 

• To end natural or political calamities (30-34.123; juan 31-32 are based primarily 
on 22 Tuanshi wulao chishu yupian zhenwen tianshu jing, 97 Taishang lingbao 
zhutian neiyin ziran yuzi, and 352 Taishang dongxuan lingbao chishu yujue 
miaojing) 

• To refine ( lian M ) his own self in order to be able to distinguish good spirits 
from evil (juan 35): “If one is incapable of refining oneself, how will he be able 
to refine demons, who live in the obscurity of hell?” (35.6b-7a) 

• To control demons (juan 36 and 45; note here the elements from the Shenxiao 
literature: compare 36.29b-35a, to 1219 Gaoshang shenxiao yuqing zhenwang 
zishu dafa 8.na-b, i4a-b, n.3b-4a, and 45.i2a-2oa to 147 Lingbao wuliang duren 
shangpin miaojing futu 2.222-302) 

• To save the life of others at the gates of death (37.ia-nb) 

• To pray for the birth of a son, for rain, or for sunshine (38.ia-ioa) 

• To send petitions to Heaven (34.i2a-i9b, juan 41-44; note that it is the 

Petition of the Nine Powers [jiuling zhangbiao 43-tb) 

Juan 46-71 describe the huanglu dazhai (48.3a), as follows: the visualiza- 

tions to be accomplished in the various rites and rituals (juan 46); the construction of 
the altar (juan 47); the host’s triple request of the master that he perform a given ritual 
(juan 48); the invitation of die gods (juan 49); the various lamp-lighting rituals (juan 
50-51); the banners (juan 52); the fu (juan 53-56); the various methods for recreating 
the body of the deceased and refining his or her souls (juan 57-65); the ritual of the 
Divine Tiger for fetching the soul out of hell (juan 66-67); the fu for the sublimation 
of the souls (juan 68-69; note that 69.i8a-25a corresponds to 147 Duren futu 3.i2b-i5b, 
and 69.25b-27b to 147 Duren futu i.2a-4b); the fu linked to the incense (juan 70); the 
preparations for the ritual, the overall program, the offerings, and the ritual vestments 
(juan 71). The book ends with the ritual and the documents for the transmission of the 
Great Method (71.21b-72.8a) and with a presentation of the master’s seals of authority 
(72.8a-i4a). 

The Duren dafa thus represents a formidable synthesis of a vast range of literature, 
ancient and recent: in addition to the books and persons already mentioned, the Duren 



i 




[ 1032 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1033 ] 



dafa cites or mentions 6 Shangqing dadong zhenjinjj, 1016 Zhen’gao, 10S2 Zongxuan xian- 
sheng xuangang lun, 666 Xisheng jing, 6s Taishang zhenyi boo fumu enzhong jing, 21s Difu 
shiwang baduyi, and others (see the two lists: 33.5b and 71.8b). The author makes ex- 
plicit use of Chen Jingyuan and Liu Hunkang, and he refers to Lu Shizhong 
and Cai Zhixu MSuM- He mentions, and on occasion uses, works of Jingming tjfl 
orTongchu origin (45.4a, 71.10b). Among contemporary movements, only the 
Tianxin zhengfa ft ft IE ft goes unmentioned. 

The Tianxin zhengfa would seem, nonetheless, to have been well known to the 
author of the Dunn dafa , for such techniques as bugang ft ie, quqi and chuiqi 
bianshen lift, and juemu if all fundamental to the rituals described in this 
manual, are probably ofTianxin zhengfa origin. There are also more specific links: the 
cup and cover method (gonggai StH ; 33.1a; cf. 1227 Taishang zhuguo jiumin zongzhen 
biyao 9.12b); the invitation of the King of Demons (Guangming (H ) when using the 
Register for Eliminating Malediction (posui lu ; 36.2ob-2ia; cf. 1227 Zongzhen 

biyao 7.35a). Also worth mention is the use of Heisha and other generals of the 
north in juan 20, as well as the role of fit and the ways of writing and animating them 
(cf. i3.6b-ioa, I5.i6a-b, and 1227 Zongzhen biyao 2.i7a-2ob). 

Of final note is a common oudook rooted, no doubt, in a common socioliturgic 
matrix. The aim ofTianxin zhengfa texts is to exorcise the demons that haunt the 
living, an aim that sometimes necessitates “saving” a troublesome ancestor. If the 
primary function of the rituals in the Duren dafa is to save the dead, that is, ances- 
tors, the manual also insists that a Taoist must first learn to control demons (45.1a), 
and it supplies an exorcistic method for rescuing the souls of the dead from hell. It is 
significant that the Book of the Divine Tiger (Shenhu yinshu ftf^lllt) on which this 
method is based is said (66.1a) to have been hidden in a cave on Longhu shan lift 
[i| by the same Ye Fashan who is the source of the Gusui lingwen one of 

the basic Tianxin zhengfa texts (see 1227 Zongzhen biyao 4.1a). 

The Tianxin zhengfa priest “accomplishes transformations on behalf of Heaven” 
(daitian xinghua fJcftfrft; 1227 Zongzhen biyao 1.8b); the Duren dafa master does 
the same, but “on behalf of the [Heavenly Worthy of the] Primordial Beginning” ( dai 
yuanshiyi xinghua iXjtjalffjit', 66.5b). The latter phrase is an adaptation of the for- 
mer and represents the liturgical transfer of the above-mentioned techniques into the 
context of Lingbao rituals for the salvation of the dead. To these exorcistic techniques 
the author of the Duren dafa adds the ritual of sublimation ( liandu /J[ ), derived in 

all probability from the Zhongxiao movement associated with the name of Xu 
Jingyang (48.5a; cf. 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 43.18a). 

John Lagerwey 



Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu mulu 

48 fols. 

Table of contents for 466 Jidu jinshu 

465 (fasc. 208) 

Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu H H ® ^ # 

10 fols. + 320 juan 

Transmitted by Ning Quanzhen (1101-1181); compilation attributed to 

Lin Lingzhen ft SR (1239-1302) 

466 (fasc. 208-263) 

“Golden Book of Salvation according to the Lingbao Tradition.” The term jidu ifj 
(ft in the title is short for dusheng jisi IS ft ft (to save the living and the dead; cf. 
the prefatory Sijiao lu [Annals of Transmission], 7b). The term lingjiao 

seems to refer to the “head of the sect” as in the phrase, “Ever since I became head 
of the sect ...” (319.20a). In combination with sishi fljSjlft (hereditary master), this 
term was considered by Jin Yunzhong to be a usurpation of a Zhengyi tide by the 
Tiantai sect (cf. 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa io.i4a-i6b). Elsewhere it is said that Lu 
Shizhong was the first to usurp this dde (see the article on 220 Wushang xuanyuan 
santian yutang dafa). 

Although this work is presented as “transmitted by Ning Quanzhen and compiled 
by Lin Lingzhen,” the “Annals,” written in 1303 by Lin Tianren ft ft if (d. 1324, dis- 
ciple and successor of Lin Lingzhen), make it clear that the present text in 320 juan 
is not the text compiled by Lin Lingzhen. The Daozang shumu xiangzhu erroneously 
attributes the present text to Lin Lingsu. This error, in turn, seems to have led to 
the confusion of our text with the forty- juan Shangqing lingbao jidu dach eng jinshu ft 
compiled in 1432 by Zhou Side jn[®f# (1359-1451), disciple 
of the Forty-third Heavenly Master, Zhang Yuchu. The latter text is attributed to 
Lin Lingsu in the Tianyi ge shumu and to Lin Lingzhen in the Tianyi ge xiancun 
shumu, 3.14698. 

The real author of the Lingjiao jidu jinshu is perhaps Lin Tianren himself: we learn 
from his biography in 602 Xiandu zhi (2.2a) that he wandered among the sacred moun- 
tains of China in order to “collect Taoist books and emend the rituals.” According to 
his biographies in Wenzhou fu zhi 26.14b and Pingyang xian zhi 7.3a— where he is called 
Lin Renzhen ftf£ R, zi Qizhi — Lin became a Taoist at the end of the Song. 
He took refuge at Sunshui M ft (near Wenzhou), where he “followed the teaching of 
Shuinan” (Lin Lingzhen). Like his master, he became famous for his performance of 
the Universal Salvation ritual ( pudu H fi)- O ne such performance is commemorated 
in a poem by Lin Jingxi ft UJ®] (1242-1310; see Jishan xiansheng ji 5.6a). Lin died in 
1324. 




[ io}4 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



Lin Tianren describes his master— Lin Weifu , fahui Lingzhen 

SR— as an erudite who “abandoned the Confucian for the Taoist” life after the 
“troubles of the ding- year” (1277?). He converted his house into an abbey, assumed 
the hao Shuinan yjc Ef, and called his abbey the Blessed Plot ( fudi of Shuinan. 
After studying Taoism with Dai Wei Wi'M (biography in Wenzhou fu zhi 26.7a), Lin 
Xuyi — (biography in Pingyang xian zhi 26.6b), and Xue Donghua jfi lj§ (cf. 
1220 Daofa huiyutm 244.2b), Lin Tianren became heir to the teaching of Donghua J|t 
!j§ . Some time later, a visit to the Heavenly Master at Longhu shan led to Lin’s being 
named Daolu MM of Wenzhou, but he preferred to go into retirement and compile 
a complete manual of the rituals of the Three Caverns ( Sandong lingjiao zhuke — • 
j[ 4iH$(Iif4), which he strove to “bring into conformity with the methods of the 
Zhengyi sect” (“Annals,” 8b). Lin presented his compiladon, a jidu zhi shu 
in twelve juan, to the Heavenly Master, who ordered it printed, and Lin himself was 
named head of the Tianqing guan H temple ( /jf is probably an error for H). In 
the list of masters given in 1220 Daofa huiyuan 244.2a-b, Lin Lingzhen is followed by 
his disciple, Dong Chuqian Mill oil (cf. “Annals,” 9a), and Dong is followed by the 
Thirty-ninth Heavenly Master, Zhang Sicheng M (d. 1344). The Pingyang xian 
zhi recounts an incident that occurred in 1431 and involved the “eighteenth hereditary 
master of the Shuinan sect,” one Lin Shizhen . 

Ning Benli 'sf.ftL, hui Quanzhen is known as an exorcist from the Tijian 
zhi (22.ia-2a). We learn from the “Annals” that Ning transmitted to Lin Lingzhen a 
teaching that represented the synthesis of Northern and Southern Taoist traditions. 
The former tradition, Ning had received fromTian Lingxu El MM, sometime before 
1126 in Kaifeng; he received the latter tradition from Shi Zixian f±-f f[Ij, sometime 
after 1126 and in the south (cf. the 1220 Daofa huiyuan list, where Tian, but not Shi, is 
mentioned). 

Tian Lingxu’s teaching seems itself to have been a synthesis of the canonical tradi- 
tion of the Three Caverns {Sandong jingjiao H PI $k$L )— which Tian is said to have 
received directly from Lu Xiujing — and a form of alchemical practice called Dong- 
hua danyuan xuanzhi ifi ¥ J 4 7C S 0 • Shi Zixian was the spiritual heir of Yang Siming 
that is, Yang Xizhen JJMfj R, recipient of the Tongchu revelations. In the 
“Annals” it says (2a) that Yang transmitted to Shi both the “fu, seals, and mudra of the 
Jade Slips from the Five Offices” {Wufuyuce fuwenyinjue fi R 3 i f H 14 ), that 

is, the Tongchu m.W texts and methods (cf. Daofa huiyuan 171.2b), and the Lingbao 
ritual tradition ( Lingbao xuanfan sishijiu pin Mlf^iSH + Acra). 

The 320 juan of this manual are preceded not only by the “Annals” but also by a 
table of contents. This table shows a number of discrepancies with the text, primarily 
in the order of the nineteen sections {pin pp ) into which both the table and the text 
divide the ritual materials. There are also discrepancies between the twenty-two ritual 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 103 s ] 



programs given in section 3 (2.2a-35a) and the ritual texts supplied for twenty-three 
programs in section 7 (juan 12-259). These rituals are of two basic kinds: those for the 
salvation {kaidu UJJJ8) of the dead (juan 42-135) and those of prayer and exorcism 
{qirang iji/rUi) for the living (juan 136-259). Juan 12-41 are composed of ritual texts 
that can be used in both kinds of program. There follows a list of the contents of the 
manual, section by section: 

1. Tanmu zhidu f® I? 44 JK iro (juan 1) : instructions for the construction of the 
altar for the various ritual programs 

2. Tanxin jinglie 1 ® { 4 l§ 44 nra (2.ia-2a): list of the gifts to be supplied by 
those who request a given ritual 

3 . Xiufeng jiemu g rra (2.2a-35a): details of the ritual programs of 

fourteen Retreats {zhai ifi) and eight Taoist rituals {daochang M$n) 

4. Shengzhen banwei 1? R ffi \\L era (juan 3-7) : list of the divinities for whom 
emplacements {wei \\L) must be provided on the altar areas for the different 
ritual programs 

5. Chaozou cixu$ft^'XFf era (juan 8-9): precise description of the Nocturnal 
Announcement {suqi ff^) and the Audience {chaoye fM ) rituals 

6. Zansong yingyong III era (juan 10-11): texts of the main hymns used 

in the various rituals 

7. Keyi licheng 14 M 1 L on (juan 12-259): texts of the rituals 

8. Ziying lingshu M U era (juan 260) : description of the method of the 
young lads ofTianshu {Tianshu tongzifa 44 (1 a R ’/£ ) for summoning the 
souls of the deceased 

9. Lianshi shengxian iff 3 4 . fill era (juan 261): funeral ritual for a high-ranking 

I Taoist 

10. Fujian kuifan ^UllEnn (juan 262-64, 266-67, 271-74): fu for use in 
various rituals 

11. Kaidu zhuishe Pi 4 ® iia Jit nn (juan 265): fu for use in summoning the souls of 

I the deceased 

12. Liandu j^/Kira (juan 268-70): fu for use in the rituals of sublimation 

13. Shuzhuan juemu H g era (juan 275-81): incantations, mudra, and 
visualizations that must accompany the use of the fu in the preceding sections 

14. Cunshen xuanmiao an (juan 282-86): mudra, visualizations, dance 

steps, et cetera, that constitute the “secret” part of the rituals 

15. Gaoming dengji §§ era (juan 287-91): texts of the “orders” that must 

accompany certain fu 

16. Fangai chenshe Jt H PH it era (juan 292): illustrations and descriptions of the 
banners to be used in the various rituals (see fig. 46) 




[ 1036 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 



17 . Biaobang guizhi (juan 293-303): texts 
of the memorials and placards used in the different 
rituals, as well as the rules for writing them 

18. Wenxi fafang (juan 304-18): texts of the 

other documents used in the rituals 

19 . Zhaijiao xuzhi fjj? jfldf era (juan 319-20): 
instructions concerning the times for and the conduct 
of rituals 

Sections 8, 9, and 19 are clearly composed of preexistent 
material. Section 8 has a preface that seems to indicate that 
the chapter concerns a form of Lingbao dafa current in the 
twelfth century and similar to the Tutang dafa 
(the author of the preface refers to a line of transmission 
including Lu Shizhong). Section 9 is certainly, section 19 
probably, by Lin Lingzhen: the former has a signed preface 
dated 1295; the latter is partially in the first person singular 
(319.20a, 320.3a, 23b) and refers to Lin Lingshen’s master, 

Lin Xuyi (320.7a). 

The work 316 Taishang jidu zhangshe was in all likelihood 
originally a part of this manual. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ding Huang, “Guoli zhongyang tushu guan zang Ming Xuande 
banian kanben.” 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang jidu zhangshe _h ® ip Mi 

3 juan 

316 (fasc. 164) 

“Writs of Pardon and Memorials, from the Book of Salvation of the Most-High.” 
This work provides, as the title indicates, the zhang ip (memorials) and the she Mi 
(writs of pardon) lacking in 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu. Almost all documents 
contained in the present collection are mentioned by their tides in the programs of 
the rituals as given in juan 2 of 466 Jidu jinshu, but the documents themselves are not 
given there. 

Conceivably, the present collection was formerly part of the 466 Jidu jinshu man ual 
The names of the rituals and the manner of indicating them in small characters beneath 
the tides are identical in both works. The memorials and the documents are presented 
in a similar— but reversed— order in the present text. 



W\TW 

* & 
* ^ 



* 

4 - 

* 



figure 46. Funerary 
banner for summoning 
and guiding the soul 
( 466 292.14b) 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1037 ] 



A small number of documents in the first juan (i3a-29a), specifically intended for 
the worship of saints or for healing and exorcism, are not mentioned in the 466 Jidu 
jinshu manual, as these rites are not included there. Juan 2 contains a “memorial for 
the translation into the heavens of the souls of an immortal” ( Shengdu xianhun zhang 
23b-24b), to be used at the occasion of the funeral of a clerical col- 
league ( shiyou BifiS ). In 466 Jidu jinshu 2.18b, this memorial is mentioned as part of 
the program of a requiem service for the remission of sins ( duxing miezui zhai )§; J? 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang sandong biaowen ic _L H j| 3 | ^ JC 

3 juan 

Ming (1368-1644)? 

982 (fasc. 616-617) 

“Memorials of the Three Caverns of the Most High.” This is a collection of formu- 
laries for a complete requiem service of an unspecified kind. It contains a complete set 
for the liandu §% ® (salvation through sublimation) rituals but offers no indications as 
to the composition of the service, the kind of officiants, or the books to be recited. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Lingbao dalian neizhi xingchi jiyao ft 15 S? 

3 fols. 

407 (fasc. 191) 

“Summary for the Practice of the Esoteric Instructions of the Great Lingbao Subli- 
mation Rite.” This summary is also found in 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa. 
ANeilian dazhi is mentioned by Jiang Shuyu ( so 8 Wushang huanglu 

dazhai lichengyi 24.11a), who incorporates this internal sublimation rite into the ritual 
for the destruction of hell (24.9b-na). Translations of the two versions of the text are 
found in Boltz (“Opening the gates of purgatory”) and Lagerwey (Taoist ritual). Boltz 
(A survey of Taoist literature, 29) suggests a Shenxiao origin for the text but provides no 
evidence for this attribution. 

The Dalian neizhi describes the salvation of souls from the point of view of the 
transformations performed by the Taoist master within his body (this performance is 
called “transformation in a gourd”; ia). Beginning with a mise en scene of the celestial 
assembly described in the first phrases of the Duren jing ® A , the rite consists in the 
transformation of hell— the region below the navel— into a Pure Land by two Jiuku 
tianzun wrapped in the light of the eyes, followed by the ascension of the 

souls in hell via the spinal column to the heart and then up the twelve stories of the 
trachea to enter into audience before the Yuanshi tianzun Along the way. 







[ 1 038 ] 3 .B .3 Lingbao 

as in the external version of these rites, the souls receive a “writ of pardon,” are bathed, 
cleanly dressed, and nourished with “sweet dew.” The audience concludes with the fu- 
sion of the souls with Yuanshi tianzun in “the double forgetting of self and things.” 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Boltz, “Opening the gates of purgatory”; Lagerwey, Taoist ritual, 2.33—35. 

John Lagerwey 

Da Ming xuanjiao licheng zhaijiao yi 01 } £ ~\L Si HI 

20 fols. 

Compiled by Song Zongzhen fcJf H et al.; prefaces dated 1374 

467 (fasc. 264) 

“Standard Ritual of the Great Ming for Taoist Retreats and Offerings.” This work 
is preceded by two prefaces. The first preface— dated Hongwu 7, eleventh month— is 
by the emperor Taizu; the second, dated to the twenty-third day of the same month 
(26 December 1374), is by the compilers Song Zongzhen, Zhao Yunzhong |§ jt 4 1 , 
Fu Tongxu Deng Zhongxiu and Zhou Xuanzhen Deng 

and Zhou are known from biographies written by Song Lian 5 jej!§ ( Song xueshi wenji 
63.73-86 and i3.6b-8a). Deng’s biography mentions that he and Song Zongzhen, 
abbot of the Chaotian gong in the capital (Nanking), were ordered by the 

emperor to compile “a ritual of prayers and sacrifices.” 

The preface by the emperor Taizu seems to suggest that he wished to reduce Tao- 
ist liturgy to this single three-day ritual of salvation. He would have dispensed with 
Taoism and Buddhism altogether, but Confucian texts alone were not enough to lead 
people to virtuous behavior, and even literati needed priests for funerals. Nonetheless, 
Taizu attempted to discontinue th egongde P]'i§, rites, which lasted seven days and for- 
bade the recitation of scriptures for obtaining the pardon of the sins of the deceased. 
The emperor therefore ordered the Office of Rites to have both Buddhists and Taoists 
prepare a text for universal use, in conformity with his wishes. 

The compilers’ preface praises the wisdom of the emperor, who, in “cutting away 
excess in order to return to simplicity,” renewed the way of the immortals. 

The text, which is for an “offering of three days for the salvation of the dead,” is 
preceded by the programs of that ritual and of reduced forms that lasted only a day or 
a day and a night. 

John Lagerwey 



3 .B .3 Lingbao [ 1039 ] 

Taishang sandong shenzhou r ;C 

12 juan 

Ming (1386-1644) 

78 (fasc. 33-35) 

“Divine Spells from the Most High Three Caverns.” A vast, unsigned, undated 
collection of invocations, incantations, spells, magic formulas, and prayers for ritual 
purposes. The spells, loosely classified under vague headings placed at the beginning 
of each juan, are mainly exorcistic in nature. Only juan 6 and juan 12 have formulas that 
accompany rituals for the salvation of souls and the repose of the dead. The collection 
opens with a version of the famous Divine Spell of Golden Light (Jinguang shenzhou 
in which the text is interspersed with pseudo-Sanskrit (dhdrani). Exacdy 
the same esoteric version can be found in 1220 Daofa huiyrnn 89.2a. Many other for- 
mulas are those of today’s popular practice, for example, the Spell for Pacifying the 
Earth God (an tudi zhou 9.5a). The same juan has a popular spell to be 

pronounced when burning sacrificial money ( huaqian zhou fkM/E; 9.3b). It seems 
safe, therefore, to date this collection to the Ming dynasty. 

Kristofer Schipper 

3.B.3.e Hymnology 

Jinlu zhai sandong zanyong yi & H M H j|§| Iff If: {|§ 

3 juan 

Compiled by Zhang Shangying H ; between 1100-1125 

310 (fasc. 161) 

“Hymns for Golden Register Retreats of the Three Caverns.” This collection of 
hymns was compiled by imperial order when Zhang Shangying was minister 
under Huizong (r. 1100-1125), perhaps in conjunction with the publication of the 
Lingbao Ritual of the Golden Register (Jinlu lingbao daochang y if an Hit If ill 

±§fi®2) in 1108 (see Song shi 20.380). The collection includes hymns written by the 
emperors Taizong (r. 976-997), Zhenzong (r. 997-1022), and Huizong. It is probable 
that Zhang did no more than add the hymns of his imperial patron, for a collection of 
the hymns ofTaizong and Zhenzong in two juan existed already (VDL91). The hymns 
of Huizong are also found in 607 Tuyin fashi 3.i6b-23b. 

John Lagerwey 



I 






[ ro40 ] 3.B.3 Lingbao 

Yuyin fashi IhS I 

3 juan 

Ming (1368-1644)? 

607 (fasc. 333) 

“Precious Tones of Liturgy.” This is the most annotated hymnal in the Daozang. 
It contains the major hymns chanted in the Lingbao liturgy. The first two juan list 
these hymns, in abridged versions, more or less in the order in which they occur in 
major rituals. The hymns are accompanied by elaborate neumatic notations. No other 
full examples of these notations have been preserved in China, and therefore, these 
juan provide important materials for the history of Chinese music (see Demieville, 
“Bombai”). The last juan contains the complete ritual for the recitation of sacred 
scriptures (qijingwen followed by the complete texts of some major hymns 

(3.16b ff.) and psalmodies. 

The qi jingwen gives indications differentiating between the ritual texts to be 
used for Pure Offerings (gingjiao jff H) for the living, on the one hand, and “Yellow 
Register ( huanglu ffl!) Retreats (requiem services) for the deceased, on the other. 
Although it is not yet exacdy known at what moment this distinction became current, 
it is definitely a development of Southern Song or later Taoism. Since Emperor Hui- 
zong, as author of a number of important hymns, is indicated as the Lord of the Tao 
of the Song Dynasty (Song Daojun M ff ), it is obvious that the present hymnology 
is from a later dynasty, probably the Ming. 

The neumatic notations indicate the voice modulations for each word, specifying 
the vocalizations and, probably, the emphasis to be given. It is impossible to interpret 
these neumes today. They do suggest, however, that some hymns, like the Pacing the 
Void ( buxu splM) stanzas (i.ia-6b), were chanted in a slow tempo, whereas others, 
such as the Hymn of the Three Sufferings (santu song 2.i2a-b) appear to have 

had a faster rhythm. 

Prominent among the hymns are the buxu stanzas of the canonical 1439 Dongxuan 
lingbao yujing shan buxu jing , which had been part of the solemn Lingbao rituals 
since the early Six Dynasties (see 1439 Buxu jing). Next come the buxu hymns for the 
imperial Golden Register Retreat (i.5a-6b and 3.23b); these hymns were written by 
Song Huizong. All other pieces— like the Triple Opening (sanqi EL’OQ) hymns by Lu 
Xiujing, originally composed to be chanted before the reading of the 1 Lingbao Wu- 
liang duren shangpin miaojing 1 (i.9b-i2b), or the magnificent psalms Joy of the Three 
(3.i6b-i9b) — are easily identified. 

At the end of the work we find the poems that accompany the solemn clothing of 
the Great Master; they have to be pronounced for each piece of his attire, beginning 
with the shoes, then the crown, the skirt, and so on. These poems were apparendy 



3.B.3 Lingbao [ 1041 ] 

chanted by acolytes, although nowadays they are pronounced by the master himself 
while he puts on his robes. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Boltz, “Neumatic notation”; Demieville, “Bombai”; Schipper, “A study of Buxu.” 

Kristofer Schipper 

Zhu shizhengao iffjfSfilJj aa 

17 fols. 

Yuan (1279-1368) or Ming (1368-1644) 

309 (fasc. 161) 

“Invocation of Masters and Zhenren.” This is a collection of forty-one Laudatory 
Invocations (goo §g) and Precious Titles (baohao W^!) of the major gods, patriarchs, 
and matriarchs of the pantheon, for liturgical purposes. The Precious Titles are ar- 
ranged in a loose hierarchical order, beginning with the Three Pure Ones, Yuhuang 
d£|l (Miluo hao 2a), Tianhuang (the Gouchen £] star), and Beiji it 

g (Ziwei Then follow the patron saint Zitong dijun # }i gf if (10b) and the 

patriarchs of the Quanzhen order (12a and 13a), the Qingwei school (13a), 
the Southern school (14a), the different Thunder magic schools, and others. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Sandong zansong lingzhang xl j|§| M M S ap 

3 juan 

Yuan (1279-1368)? 

314 (fasc. 162) 

“Supernatural Stanzas, Hymns, and Lauds of the Three Grottoes.” The hymns (song 
)|j) and stanzas (zhang |S) are usually in seven-word verse; the songs (ge ®) and 
lauds (zan ,1f) in five- word verse. 

The text could have been compiled during the Yuan dynasty in the milieu of the 
Maoshan if |!| movement. In 3.nb-i3a, there is a Laud to the Heaven of the Lord of 
Pervading Mystery, Chongmiao xiansheng This title is probably the hao 

of Jiang Zongying (d. 1281), thirty-eighth patriarch of the Shangqing lineage, 

author of a commentary to the Dadongjing j\. ([§] (according to the 304M.aoshan zhi 
12.9b), a text that recurs frequently in the third chapter as the object of lauds. 

But the same hao could also refer to Li Sicong $ I® , a Taoist of the Xiangfu gong 
(Kaifeng area, founded between 1008 and 1016), author of 1063 Dongyuanji in 
nine juan, the preface of which is dated 1050. 

Giovanni Vitiello 



[ 1042 ] 3.B.4 Shangqing 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao zhihui lizan i; .1: jfnj £ II U t? I! Hit 

7 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644)? 

609 (fasc. 334) 

“Hymns of Wisdom from the Lingbao Liturgical Canon.” The present text borrows 
its tide from the first item in this small collection of hymns and recitations for the 
Lingbao Retreat: the “Taishang zhihui lizan Eli'S: $ 1111 ” in eight stanzas, from 
42s Shangqing taiji yinzhu yujing baojue i8a-2oa and given here in its complete form. 
The remaining hymns, with the tides “tujian song ±ffgfi,” “jiangzhen and 

“xiezhen Hf R ,” are of unidentified and apparendy modem origin. The last part of the 
text has an elaborate version of the Homage to the Ten Directions (“li shifang if -f- 
E”) and the chanhui Ifcffg recitations. 

It is uncertain whether the term mingdai RJj ft (5b) should be read as a reference to 
the dynasty of that name. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Da Ming yuzhi xuanjiao yuezhang E El I® I 

10 fols. 

First half of the fifteenth century 

981 (fasc. 616) 

Collection of Imperial Hymns of the Ming Dynasty.” This work is composed of 
hymns for Offerings and for the cults of the Xu brothers and of Xuandan shangdi. 
All hymns are accompanied by gongchi musical notation. Since the emperor Chengzu 
(r. 1403-1424) was intimately associated with both of the above cults, undoubtedly 
these hymns must be attributed to him. The hymns for the Xu brothers’ cult are 
perhaps those mentioned in the table of contents of, but no longer extant in, 1470 Xu- 
xian zhenlu 4; all the documents in that juan of 1470 Xwcian zhenlu date to the years 

1417-1419. 

John Lagerwey 



3.B.4 Shangqing 

In the late Tang (618-907) and early Song (960-1279), the Shangqing lineage 
became identified with Maoshan the holy mountain of Jiangsu. This center 

enjoyed the patronage of many emperors, and the great Song Huizong (r. noo-1125) 
even became a close friend of one of the abbots, Liu Hunkang, whom the emperor 



3.B.4 Shangqing [ 1043 ] 

presented with many paintings from his own hand. The most conspicuous monu- 
ment to the glory of the Maoshan center was, however, the magnificent chronicle 304 
Maoshan zhi, published around 1330 under the auspices of the Xuanjiao patriarch Wu 
Quanjie. The most celebrated writers and artists of the period contributed to this 
prestigious publication. 

The Maoshan patriarchs did much to preserve their literary heritage, and they ed- 
ited many texts, including the important Dadong zhenjing E iPHlllM, which, in spite 
of its high status among the Shangqing scriptures, apparendy had never been fully 
edited before. 

Like the other great centers, the Maoshan was touched by the wave of newly re- 
vealed esoteric, mosdy exorcistic, rites. Among many such rites, we may quote the 
revelation by the Most High Lord Lao of 632 Taishang taiqung tiantong burning miao- 
jing (full of pseudo-Sanskrit dharant) to the illiterate leper Liang Guangying 
who worked as a servant at the Yuchen guan. 

Also influential and perhaps related is the Tongchu fit jfEJjE exorcist lineage that 
originated on Maoshan in the early thirteenth century. The rites of this lineage are 
preserved in 1220 Daofa huiyuan. Here we find a Shangqing tongchu wuyuan sufuyuce 
zhengfa E Ih E E ^ E E fffi IE E (juan 171-178), with a colophon of the liturgist 

Jin Yunzhong, author of 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa. Along with the other great 
exorcistic rites from Tianxin zhengfa EElEfife and Shenxiao Ef 1 Ef , the Tongchu fu 
methods were adopted into the great liturgical synthesis of the Southern Song. 

3.B.4.a Scriptures 

Shangqing dadong zhenjing _ h ?jf E El B H? 

6 juan 

Preface by Zhu Ziying H (974-1029); edited by Jiang Zongying fflzRlk 

(d. 1281); colophons by Cheng Gongduan JiEiffn (dated 1272) and Zhang Yuchu 
(1361-1410) 

6 (fasc. 16-17) 

“True Scripture of the Great Cavern of Shangqing.” The present edition of the 
Dadong zhenjing E El BIS is the closest of all the extant versions to the Shangqing 
original, which was a collection of stanzas that described the wanderings of the deities 
in the heavens, their manifestations in the human body, and their intercession for the 
salvation of the adepts and their ancestors. The recitation of the stanzas was accompa- 
nied by visualizations of these deities in the body. For these reasons, xhc Dadong zhen- 
jing is considered the text that established the link between the domains of the body 
and those of the heavens. The stanzas, which abound with names of deities and of their 



( 



[ 1044 ] 3.B.4 Shangqing 



3.B.4 Shangqing [ 104s ] 



heavenly abodes, cannot be understood without the revealed commentary as given in 
YJQQ 8.ia-i4a and without a full understanding of Shangqing terminology. 

The present version was edited by the thirty-eighth Maoshan patriarch, Jiang 
Zongying. His biography in 304 Maoshan zhi states that he wrote a commentary to 
the Dadong yujing ^ M 5 IS • Jiang’s edition was printed by his disciple Cheng Gong- 
duan, who states that this Dadong jing was transmitted at the main sanctuary of the 
Shangqing tradition on Maoshan “for more than 1,000 years” (see the Cheng’s colo- 
phon). The text we have here is from a later printing by a daoshi from Fujian named 
Xiong Changyi (see Zhang Yuchu’s colophon). 

The preface is signed by the twenty-third Maoshan patriarch, Zhu Ziying. The 
work 103 Yuqing wuji zongzhen Wenchang dadong xianjing zhu 1.7a mentions Zhu Zi- 
yi n g as the author of a commentary on the Dadong jing. The preface is, for the greater 
part, composed by excerpts from 1313 Dongzhen gaoshang yudi dadong ciyiyujian wulao 
baojing (na and 7b) and from 1314 Dongzhen taishang suling dongyuan dayou miaojing 
(3a-b). There are colophons by Cheng Gongduan (dated 1272) and by the Forty-third 
Heavenly Master, Zhang Yuchu. 

Comparison of the present version with the annotations on the variant readings of 
the Dadong jing given in 104 Shangqing dadong zhenjing yujue yinyi by Chen Jing- 
yuan and in 103 Xianjing zhu by Wei Qi WsM shows that this text is not what these 
scholars called “the Maoshan version” (. Maoshan ben cf., for instance, 104 

Yujue yinyi 337 with 739 of our text; or 103 Xianjing zhu 4.20a with 3.2b of our text). 
Also, the first part of 104 Yujue yinyi (ia-b9) is lacking in the present text; this passage 
can be found instead in 13SS Shangqing taishang yuqing yinshu miemo shenhui gaoxuan 
zhenjing ta. Nevertheless, the present version is close to the Maoshan ben quoted by 
Chen and Wei. Our text might well correspond to the “Zhu Ziying version,” which 
Chen Jingyuan called the Sandongfashi Guanmiao xiansheng ben 9 l 

^ (Guanmiao was Zhu Ziying’s hao). Indeed, 104 Yujue yinyi naj corresponds to 
our text 6.7a. We have seen that Zhu is also credited with a commentary to the Dadong 
jing. It is therefore likely that the glosses in this edition are his. 

The first juan is devoted to the meditation rites to be performed in relation with 
the recitation of the text. Here again, most of the formulas and instructions come 
from other Shangqing texts, such as 1332 Dongzhen taishang taixiao langshu 3.5b-6a, 
13SS Gaoxuan zhenjing sb-6a, 1314 Dayou miaojing 4ib-42b, and 1330 Dongzhen Taiyi 
dijun taidan yinshu dongzhen xuan jing nb, 12a, i3a-b. Parts of these rites are similar to 
rituals used for the practice of the Shangqing version of the Book of the Yellow Court 
{Shangqing huangting neijing jing _h M II 1*3 IS M . ; see YJQQ i2.57a-6oa). 

The text of the Dadong jing proper begins with juan 2 and ends on 6.15b. It is 
divided into thirty-nine sections, a division that corresponds to the traditional version 
of the Shangqing school. A comparison between the original text and the revealed 



commentary (as given in YJQQ 8.ia-i4a; see Robinet, “Le Ta-tung chen-ching ) al- 
lows us to distinguish the original parts and the later additions. These additions are 
(1) certain stanzas entitled “Dadong yujing (e.g., 2.2a); (2) the stanzas 

dedicated to the kings of the Yuqing TL '?# heaven; and (3) the esoteric names of the 
heavens and the exoteric names of the earths. 

Two strata can be distinguished in the added materials. First there are the passages 
that originated from 13SS Gaoxuan zhenjing and that provide indications for the visu- 
alization of the deities of the body and the formulas to call them up. Next there are 
later additions that are probably due to Jiang Zongying. These are the prescriptions 
for visualization given just before the “Dadong yujing” stanzas and also, most prob- 
ably, those that accompany the fu at the end of each section. 

The present work ends with a Secret Formula of the Whirlwind and of the Fusion 
with the One-Ancestor {Huaifeng hunhe diyi bijue flUJUi S "a'S? $!'!£; 6.16a— 18a), 
which can also be found in 254 Dadong jinhua yujing iob-nb and in 140s Changsheng 
taiyuan shenyong jing 8a— 9a. This is probably an apocryphal Shangqing text that existed 
already at the times ofTAO Hongjing (see the quotation of 421 Dengzhen yinjue in 
104 Yujue yinyi 12a). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Robinet, “Le Ta-tung chen-ching.” 

Isabelle Robinet 

Shi dichen Donghua shangzuo siming Yangjun zhuanji 

M M if! IP ± ft sJ ffr *§ M IB 

15 fols. 

Song dynasty (960-1279) 

1428 (fasc. 1055) 

“Biography of Mr. Yang, Imperial Chamberlain, Senior Assistant of the Dong- 
hua [Palace], and Director of Destinies [of Wu ^ and Yue M]” This is a later work 
that — though based on original material in 1016 Zhen’gao — is not mentioned biblio- 
graphically before the twelfth century (VDL 95). 

In this text, Yang Xi (b. 330), who received the Shangqing revelations between 
364 and 370, bears the name Yang Xihe fill IP, unknown in earlier times, but that 
reappears in some texts of the Qingwei [If W tradition (e.g., 171 Qjngwei xianpu 7a). 
According to 304 Maoshan zhi 10. 6b, Xihe was Yang’s adult name (zi ^). Yang Xi’s 
year of death is given as 388, slightly later than that given by Tao Hongjing {1016 
Zhen’gao 20.11b: 386 or earlier). 

Despite its later date, the present biography is almost entirely composed of passages 
taken verbatim from the Zhen’gao, that is, Yang Xi’s own recordings of his visionary 




[ 1046 ] 3.B.4 Shangqing 



3.B.4 Shangqing [ 1047 ] 



encounters with his celestial bride and other immortals from the Shangqing heaven. 
The immortals also dedicated a number of poems to him (cf. 1016 Zhen’gao i.na-i8a, 
2.ia-2b, 2.5b-iob, j.iob-na). 

U rsula-A nqelika Cedzich 

Dadon g yujing A PI Ti f ^ 

2 juan 

Colophon by Gong Detong Stfl* fn} ; early Ming (1368-1644) 

7 (fasc. 18) 

“True Scripture of the Great Cavern.” This is an abbreviated version of the Dadong 
zhenjing , and is generally close to the original Shangqing version. Gong Detong states 
that the present text is based on an annotated edition by the zhenren Zhao Taixuan 
j\ 2 . This edition was found in 1365 at Longhu shan (here called Hantan (H ffl [Altar 
of the Han] ) by Xiong Taigu ffej£.f 5 ,zi Linchu $] , an official who became a Taoist 
recluse at the end of the Yuan. This edition was then copied by a teacher ( lianshi M f® ) 
at Longhu shan named Zhou Lanxue /nj fUf , who gave it to Gong. 

The beginning of the text (ia-7b) is devoted to preparatory invocations and fu. One 
of the fu, the Chenling fu on page 2b, is linked traditionally to the Dadong 

zhenjing (see 1313 Dongzhen gaoshang yudi dadong ciyi yujian wulao baojing 16a and 
413 Shangqing pei fuwen boquanjue 4a), although it is lacking in the edition by Jiang 
Zongying (6 Shangqing dadong zhenjing), whereas the long invocation on pages 4a-sb 
can be found in Jiang’s edition on pages i.9a-iob. This invocation comes originally 
from 13SS Shangqing taishang yuqing yinshu miemo shenhui gaoxuan zhenjing sa-6a. The 
preparatory practices as they are given here are thus within the Shangqing tradition. 

The text of the stanzas is virtually the same as in Jiang’s edition (where the stanzas 
are quoted as Dadong yujing), but the present version is more complete. For instance, 
the commentary on the expression yuming in 1.8a is also given in the revealed 
commentary quoted in YJQQ 8.3b, but it is lacking in Jiang’s edition. The same re- 
vealed commentary gives a number of additional hymns and “sounds” of the heavens 
that are lacking here but that are quoted in Jiang’s edition. To conclude: the text of the 
Dadong yujing is more complete here, but other elements that belonged to the Dadong 
zhenjing are absent. 

The glosses are placed after the stanzas. They are of a textual nature and follow the 
revealed commentary as quoted in YJQQ 8.ia-i4a. 

Isabelle Robinet 



Shangqing dadong zhenjing yujue yinyi h A p] I? 3 i !£ : r S 

16 fols. 

By Chen Jingyuan (1025-1094) 

104 (fasc. 54) 

“Jade Instructions and Phonetic Explanations on the Scripture of the Great Cav- 
ern.” This is a collection of philological notes on the Dadong zhenjing and related texts. 
The author uses and compares a number of different versions of the Dadong zhenjing, 
the most important of which are the versions by Zhu Ziying (6 Shangqing dadong 
zhenjing) and HuangfuXi Jiff#, both of the period 1023-1031. For variant readings 
Chen also consulted the Tiqie daojing yinyi — - it by Shi Chong — now 
lost (see 1123 Tiqie daojing yinyi miaomen youqi) — and an unknown old manuscript 
( guben S $ )• 

Other related texts treated here: 

• The Hidden Texts of the Inner Invocations ( neizhu yinwen JftH’ 2 ) of the 

Miemo shenhui yujing yinshu (see 13SS Shangqing taishang yuqing yinshu miemo 
shenhui gaoxuan zhenjing) 

• The Precious Glosses of the Old Lord ( daojunyuzhu jjflt 3 i.fi:) which 
corresponds to the revealed commentary partially preserved in YJQQ 8.ia-i8b 

. The Method of the Return to the Origin ( huiyuan fa [ijefi) as given in 1377 
Shangqing taishang jiuzhen zhongjing jiangsheng shendanjue 4b-na 

• The Cinnabar Stanzas in Purple Writing (ziwen danzhang which 

come from 13SS Gaoxuan zhenjing 37b-42b 

• The Superior Method of the Hundred Gods ( baishen shangfa Hf # ± f£ ) from 
the beginning of 1360 Shangqing jiutian shangdi zhu baishen neimingjing. This 
text gives the names of the heavens and the earths that are placed at the end of 
each section of 6 Shangqing dadong zhenjing. 

Isabelle Robinet 

Shangqing taishang kaitian longqiao jing _h ill ic Jl fUI ic 3 R M. 

5 juan 

Song (960-1279)? 

1354 (fasc. 1037) 

“Book of the Dragon Stilts That Open up Heaven, a Supreme Purity Scripture 
of the Most High.” A book called longqiao fggjf (Dragon Stilts) is mentioned in the 
library of Ge Hong, as well as in the books that the Queen Mother of the West gave 
to Han Wudi (r. 140-87 B.C.; see 292 Han Wudi neizhuan). No early work with this 
title has survived. 

The present scripture belongs to a later stage. In spite of its title, there seems to 
be no direct relationship with the Shangqing scriptures. The work is presented as the 



f 104S ] 3.B.4 Shangqing 



3.B.4 Shangqing [ 104.9 ] 



teachings received from the immortal Ning Fengzi =£ f\ f- (see 294 Liexian zhuan 
1.1b), which is not part of the Maoshan revelations. A Shangqing taishang longqiao jing 
_h lit A _t fl 5 $i IS is mentioned in 304 Maoshan zhi 9.4a as part of the holdings of the 
Maoshan library in the Yuan period. It is difficult to say whether this was the same 
work we have here. A Shangqing taishang longqiao jingtu T.iW A_h PI with 

talismans is mentioned as lost in 1430 Daozang quejing mulu 1.2a. 

A Lingbao longqiao zhi jing ® is quoted in the Daomen dalun xtlf"! 

Aim (in YJQQ 6.4b): “Long ago, Huangdi ... at the Qingcheng shan met 

Lord Ning Feng and received from him the Lingbao longqiao zhi jing V This could be a 
reference to our book, except that the meeting between these two figures in our text 
does not take place on Qingcheng shan but on Yuntai shan ill- Later in the Dao- 
men dalun, the twelve categories of texts in the Taoist canon are presented with slight 
differences from those listed in the presented text. Moreover, whenever the revelation 
is presented by Ning Fengzi, he mentions the book as Taishang kaitian yuanzhi pinjing 
AAiillAABmfM- Only on the last page is a longqiao HSf talisman mentioned. 
The scripture is divided into thirteen chapters (pin nq), and many of these carry the 
epithet yuanzhi AS (originally established). The present book is indeed quoted as 
Kaitian yuanzhi pinjing in 723 Daode zhenjing jiyi dazhi, by Liu Weiyong Mil f$l zR and 
Ding Yidong Rf HiK (dated 1299; 1.4a), and this long quotation is consistent with 
3.5b in the present work. We may therefore consider that Kaitian yuanzhi pinjing is the 
correct tide of the scripture. 

There is a consistent logical structure to the whole work that develops a complete 
Taoist cosmology. This framework starts out from the well-known Three Qi of the 
Tianshi dao ii theology: xuan fS,yuan ft, and shi (tn ■ These pneumata created 
the Three Caverns ( sandong H M ) and their scriptures. The scriptural body of the San- 
dong canon is subdivided into thirty-six parts, and three times twelve categories is the 
very model of the structure of the universe and the human body. There are, however, 
numerous repetitions and unnecessary elaborations, suggesting that the present work 
is an expansion and a rewriting of an ancient text. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 

Shangqing danyuan yuzhen dihuang feixian shangjing 

5 fols. 

404 (fasc. 191) 

“Superior Book of the Flying Immortals by the Sovereign of Precious Truth Cin- 
nabar Origin, a Shangqing Scripture.” This book contains a series of exercises for the 
absorption of stellar effluvia. The exercises are from the Shangqing tradition but are 
not linked explicidy to any of its canons. The postface declares that this text was re- 



vealed by Lord Wang, superintendent of the Zhenren (Xicheng zongzhen wangjun 0 
IS Jl 3: H ), who transmitted it not only to the Lord Mao Sf fS but also to a Lord 
Cai H ft , zhenren of Wenshui '{St A £H A (a river in Shandong). The same saint is also 
mentioned in 994 Shangqing taiyuan shenlong qiongtai chengjing shangxuan yuzhang . 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang yuchen yuyi jielin ben riyue t«A_h3ijfiiift§$n$?#El,flli] 

17 fols. 

Southern Song dynasty (1127-1279)? 

435 (fasc. 196) 

“Illustrated Version of the Flight to die Sun and the Moon of Yuyi and Jielin, of the 
Supreme Heaven of Jade Aurora.” The book describes the method of flying to the sun 
and the moon (ben riyue zhi dao H £.M) (fig- 47), which according to the texts 
of the Shangqing tradition was transmitted originally by Taisu zhenren A ^ lit A 

to Pei Xuanren H S t (see Qing- 
ling zhenren Peijun zhuan '/jf fl Jt 
All IlfU, in YJQQ 105). Parts of 
the method are included in Pei’s 
biography in YJQQ 105, and it is 
elaborated further in several of 
the early Shangqing scriptures, 
notably, 639 Huangtian shang- 
qing jinque dijun lingshu ziwen 
shangjing and 1376 Shangqing 
taishang dijun jiuzhen zhongjing 2. 
A new version of the method was 
invented within the Yutang dafa 
iE^Ali tradition founded by 
Lu Shizhong in the 1120s (see 
220 Wushang xuanyuan santian 
yutang dafa). 

The present book combines 
elements from all of the above- 
mentioned sources, opening with 
a series of excerpts from the biog- 
raphy of Lord Pei (ia; cf. YJQQ 
105.16a and 17a; 2a-b; cf. YJQQ 
105.20b, 21b, 20a, 19a; 2b-3b; 
cf. YJQQ io5.i9b-2oa, 22b, 18b, 




figure 47. Flying to the moon on a phoenix (43s 12a). 
Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/432) 




[ ioso ] 3.B.4 Shangqing 



3.B.4 Shangqing [ lost ] 



2ia-b). The book continues with quotations from a Tutting zongzhi h (i.e., 

221 Wushang santian yutcmg zhengzong gaoben neijing yushu ) and from the Lingshu 
ziwen (6a-b; cf. 639 Lingshu ziwen 4a-b, 6b-7a, passim). The prominent 

position of the Yutang dafa elements in the exposition of the method would seem to 
indicate that the book was compiled within the framework of this tradition, and thus 
most likely during the Southern Song. 

Paul Andersen 

Taishang taiqing tiantong hunting miaojing Jz _L j# iX: a H $ I? 

5 fols. 

632 (fasc. 321) 

Taishang taiqing huanglao dijun yunlei tiantong yinfan xianjing 

umiimmxtawH 

3 fols. 

633 (fasc. 321) 

The Taishang taiqing tiantong hunting miaojing (“Life Protecting Book of the 
Heavenly Lads of Utmost Purity, [Spoken] by the Most High) is a short spell of 
less than 300 characters and is attributed here to Liang Guangying alias 

Liang Wuzhen 2 f£fgjJ|, who received it from Laojun in 1109 or 1112. This work 633 
Taishang taiqing huanglao dijun yunlei tiantong yinfan xianjing (Immortal Scripture 
of the Heavenly Lads in the Secret Language of Brahman) is the same text, enriched 
with added phrases in pseudo-Sanskrit. The dating and attribution of both texts are 
problematic. 

The Junzhai dushu zhi lists a Tiantong burning miaojing and says 

that the Handan tushu zhi tJ|$ SI H * has a similar entry, which may mean that our 
text was already extant in the middle of the eleventh century (VDL 84). The YJQQ 
I22.i6a-b has a preface by Song Zhenzong (r. 997-1022) to the Tiantong burning 
miaojing, appended to Du Guangting’s sqo Daojiao lingyan ji This 

preface is followed by an anecdote relating a miracle that occurred in 892, occasioned 
by reciting the text; the anecdote is not found in other versions of the Daojiao lingyan 
ji. Both texts (preface and anecdote) are put at the end of the YJQQ. They may well be 
a later addition. This preface is also reproduced in 770 Hunyuan shengji 9.39b-4oa. 

According to 770 Hunyuan shengji 9. 45(3-462, Liang Guangying, a leper, entered 
the Yuchen guan BE ft® on Maoshan as a serf in 1112. His duty was to fetch water 
from the pond in front of the monastery. After several years, Laojun appeared to him, 
saying: “Do you know my Tiantong burning miaojing ? It has been in circulation in 
this world since a long time.” When Liang avowed that he did not know it, Laojun 
taught it to him and told him to recite it over water that would heal him and others of 
leprosy. A note appended to this story states that the text revealed on this occasion was 



the Tiantong burning miaojing “current today.” The Hunyuan shengji was presented to 
the throne in 1191. Our text has a long colophon (dated 1144) attributed to Fu Xiao f!f 
fSJ , the author of ioso Huayang Taoyinjuji. Fu (or the anonymous author) states that 
he was inspired to write this colophon by the Hunyuan shengji, an obvious contradic- 
tion. However, the colophon gives 1109 as the date of the revelation and calls the text 
revealed to Liang a version, “with added phrases” (Yuchen guan shiben BE ft H $ ), 

of the Jiaju Tiantong burning miaojing 

The work 304 Maoshan zhi 9.9a mentions a stele of this very text in the Yuchen guan, 
saying that it was “revealed in 1109 to Liang Wuzhen.” The same source mentions 
(18. ib) that this stele was located in the Ruixiang dian dedicated to a Tang 

statue of Laojun, a fact that concurs with the contents of the colophon. The discrep- 
ancy in the date of the revelation— vis-a-vis that given in the Hunyuan shengji— may 
well be explained by the fact that the latter text tries to link this event to political devel- 
opments of the times. The epithet “with added phrases” used for the version revealed 
to Liang, would seem to indicate that Liang’s version was not the present text. 

On the other hand, 633 Yinfan xianjing is a version to which phrases of pseudo- 
Sanskrit (dharani) were added between the sentences of the original text, correspond- 
ing to the description “with added phrases.” Such additions are in keeping with the 
vogue for pseudo-Sanskrit in Taoist texts of the Huizong (r. 1100-1125) and early 
Southern Song (1127-1279) periods. If 633 Yinfan xianjing corresponds to the revela- 
tion to Liang, then 632 Tiantong burning miaojing could be the older version men- 
tioned in the Junzhai dushu zhi. This version has been, and is still today, used widely 
for liturgical purposes (see 1224 Daomen dingzhi 5.9b). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Shangqing wuying zhentong heyou neibian yujing 

3 fols. 

988 (fasc.618) 

“Precious Book of Inner Transformation, of the Harmonious Voyage of the True 
Lad of Void Luminosity, a Shangqing Canon.” This is a small treatise on a meditation 
technique, wherein the god Wuying is visualized, and then seen roaming through the 
body, according to (he 'a) a cyclical sequence. The method was revealed to the Green 
Lad, Jade Keeper King (Yubao wang Qingtong daojun BE {>£ BE W M (it If )• Wuying 
is first mentioned in 303 Ziyang zhenren neizhuan (see Porkert, Biographie d’un taoiste 
legendaire, 101 ff.) as one of the triad of great gods of the body. Of minor importance 
in the Shangqing pantheon, this deity, assimilated to the immortal embryo, was largely 
adopted by Lingbao scriptures. 

Kristofer Schipper 




[ ios 2 ] 3.B.4 Shangqing 



3.B.4 Shangqing [ ios 3 ] 



Shangqing shenbao dongfang zhenhui shangjing 

7 fols. 

989 (fasc. 618) 

“Superior Book [Revealing] the True Secret Names of the Arcane Chambers, a 
Divine Treasure of the Shangqing Canon.” The present text, which is cognate withpS# 
Shangqing wuying zhentong heyou neipianyujing, presents itself as a sutra-like revelation 
by the Green Lad, Jade Keeper King (Yubao wang Qingtong daojun TifSTi WaxS 
H ) of the esoteric names of the spirits of the body. The practices of visualizing the 
latter and “gathering the florescence” of the cosmic bodies are also described. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang dongzhen wuxing bishou jing A _h il§] [JJ £ M ffc J§ $M 

5 fols. 

44 (fasc. 29) 

“Revealed Scripture on the Five Planets of the Most High Dongzhen.” If this text 
is linked by its tide (Dongzhen ]|S| jj| ) to the Shangqing literature on the Five Planets, 
and by its form to the revealed scriptures of the Lingbao canon, it resembles in con- 
ception and content two Dongshen texts with the term wuxing £ J? (Five Planets) 
in their tides: 976 Taishang dongshen wuxing zan £ §§§ and 6S7 Taishang dongshen 
wuxing zhusu riyue hunch ang jing. A. Lingbao wuxing bishou jing SHESffiS I? is 
mentioned in the list of the Bishu sheng xubiandao siku queshu mu (VDL 99). 

Whenever certain astral divinities— nine of the eleven lords of 43 Yuanshi tianzun 
shuo shiyiyao da xiaozai shenzhoujing are mentioned here— shine upon a given region 
of Earth, a natural catastrophe occurs. The severity of the disaster is a result of the sins 
that are reported to Heaven by the spiritual officers of the nine provinces on the days 
of the Three Principles. Therefore, Yuanshi tianzun not only reveals the 

appropriate incantations for each of the divinities mentioned, but also describes their 
clothing so that people can make images of them and worship them, especially on the 
days of the Three Principles. 

As in the case of 43 Shenzhoujing, the recitation of the present text is mentioned 
in 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa 33.5b. The two texts are also mentioned 
together in 122s Daomen kefan daquanji 45.1b. 

John Lagerwey 

Shangqing bidaojiujing huiyao heshen shangzhen yujing 

4 fols. 

993 (fasc. 619) 

“Precious Book of the Superior Zhenren for Harmonizing the Spirit with the Re- 
turned Efflorescences of the Nine Stars, a Secret Way of the Shangqing.” This book 



contains a late and popular method decribing how to meditate on the stars of the 
Dipper and absorb their rays, which are assimilated in the adept’s body. In addition, 
the text gives a simple recipe for abstaining from grains (pigu 4b). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Shangqing taiyuan shenlong qiongtai chengjing shangxuan yuzhang 

5 fols. 

994 (fasc. 619) 

“Precious Text of the Carnelian Embryo of the Divine Dragon from the Great 
Abyss, for Riding the Rays to the Mysterious on High, a Shangqing Canon.” Revealed 
by the Zhenren of Wenshui /Jc R A, this text contains an unusual method of visual- 
izing and absorbing a mystic dragon pearl (shenlong zhi zhu ia). The text 

is cognate with 404 Shangqing danyuan yuzhen dihuang feixian shangjing. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Shangqing daobao jing Jt iff xltSf $§? 

5 juan 

Song (960-1279)? 

1353 (fasc. 1036-1037) 

“Shangqing Book of Treasures of the Tao.” This is an encyclopedia of Taoism, based 
mostly but not exclusively on the Shangqing scriptures. The materials are classified 
according to topic; topics range from the scriptures and the pantheon to practice and 
dietetics. The method consists of quoting phrases and expressions from different un- 
identified sources (sometimes in duplication, see the entry on the Dadong zhenjing on 
1.5b and 4.2b) followed by detailed explanations, some of which are quite lengthy. 

The present work is quoted several times in 397 Dongxuan lingbao ziran jiutian 
shengshen yuzhang jing jie by Wang Xichao jj|, zi Yinxian IMS, and dated 1205. 

The citations can be traced in this work; see, for instance, 1.23a and 3.14a. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 

3.B.4.b Registers 

Shangqing dantian sanqi yuhuang liuchen feigang siming dalu 

14 fols. 

675 (fasc. 353) 

“Shangqing Register of Flying Steps of the Six Stars That Govern Fate of the Jade 
Sovereign of the Three Pneumata of the Cinnabar Heaven.” This long and unstruc- 
tured title, with its Shangqing epithet, designates a modern talismanic register of the 




[ I0S4- ] 3 .B .4 Shangqing 



3 .B .4 Shangqing [ loss ] 




figure 48. Meditating Taoist (67s 3a). Ming 
reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/670) 



six stars of the (fictitious) Southern 
Dipper (Nandou ), the constel- 
lation of Long Life. The text explains 
and illustrates how to meditate on 
these deities, as well as on their ladies 
(see figs. 48-51). 

The dance steps (feibu M sP or fei- 
£/anp ffIM) on the Southern Dipper 
pattern to which the tide of this text 
refers are mentioned only in two talis- 
mans (2a-b). They were to be drawn 
on the soles of the adept’s feet. The 
dance pattern itself is not mentioned 
further. It is described in some detail 
in 638 Taisbanjj feibu nandou taiwei 
yujing. 

Kristofer Schipper 




figure 50. Meditation on the Dipper while 
reclining ( 67s 4b-5a). Ming reprint of 1598. 
Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de 
France. (Chinois 9546/670) 








! 

-r 



* 



_2L 



-£f 




figure 49. Vestments ( 67s 3b-4a). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale 
de France. (Chinois 9546/670) 



figure 51. Jade Maidens (67s 7b-8a). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the 
Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/670) 



[ ios6 ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 

3.B.4.C Rituals 

Dongxuan lingbao zhenren xiuxing yannian yisuanfa 

12 fols. 

1271 (fasc. 1003) 

“Longevity Methods of the Zhenren.” This collection of minor rites and rules is 
placed under the aegis of the Dongxuan Lingbao canon. It is a patchwork of quota- 
tions from different sources. Both 1016 Zhen’gao and 421 Dengzhen yinjue are quoted 
twice. Further implicit citations from the Zhen’gao include 8a, 9a-b, 10b, and 11a. 

Isabelle Robinet 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 

The Tianxin zhengfa ^C'L'IEsfe (Correa Method of the Heart of Heaven) was 
founded at the beginning of the Song period (960-1279) by the scholars Tan Zixiao 
andRAO Dongtian. In 994, on Mount Huagai |§ H in central Jiangxi, Rao discov- 
ered a set of “the secret formulas of the Heart of Heaven” ( tianxin bishi RR^L-R). 
These formulas were considered to have belonged originally to Zhang Daoling Jjf 
It , in his capacity of chief of the Department of Exorcism (Quxie yuan They 

concerned a form of exorcism, especially for illnesses caused by possession (sui ), 
known as kaozhao fa (the method of inspecting [demons] and summoning 

[spirits]). Four saints ( sisheng [19 SE) identified with a constellation around the Pole 
Star— Tianpeng fj M , , Tianyou R , Yisheng )£$ W. (previously Heisha M ; see 128s 

Tisheng baode zhuan ), and Zhenwu LpJ —were at the center of these exorcisms. One 
of the charaaeristics of the method is that the talismans used to expel demons are 
made in the likeness of the four saints. During the Song period, shrines were erected 
for the worship of these deities (see ps 8 Xuantian shangdi qisheng lu 2.i3a-b). More- 
over, the great popularity of the rites in Song times can be seen from works such as 
1227 Taishang zhuguo jiumin zongzhen biyao by Yuan Miaozong jtP'f'if. — which was 
compiled, according to its preface of 1116, for inclusion in the new Taoist canon of 
Song Huizong (r. 1100-1125) — as well as from stories in the Tijian zhi by Hong Mai 
ill (1123-1203). See also the cognate scripture 1412 Taishang yuanshi tianzun shuo beidi 
fumo shenzhou miaojing, discussed under the cult of Beidi. 

Although it does not seem that the Tianxin zhengfa became institutionalized in the 
form of a special Taoist order, it did promulgate its own rules— for both its officiants 
and the deities involved— with its exorcistic practices (see, for instance, 461 Shangqing 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ I0S7 ] 

gusui lingwen guild). It also established initiation grades and tides, which later merged 
with those of the Shenxiao rites (see Taishang tiantan yuge and Tai- 
shang hundong cbiwen niiqing zhaoshu tianlu in 1220 

Daofa huiyuan 249-52). 

In the early Southern Song period (1127-1279), a local official named Lu Shi- 
z h o n g developed the Yutang dafa after he had had a vision of Zhao Sheng 

til?-, Zhang Daoling’s foremost disciple, who showed him where to find secret texts 
on Maoshan IF |i| . Thus we have here exorcistic rituals of the Tianxin zhengfa type 
that also make extensive use of traditional meditation techniques of the Shangqing 
tradidon; they are, moreover, adapted to the performance of the Yellow Register Re- 
treat ( huanglu zhai HflKW) for the salvation of the deceased. 

A final important document of this tradition is 101s Jinsuo liuzhu yin (Guide to the 
Golden Lock and the Moving Pearls), a vast manual of kaozhao 1=] rites that was 
developed from the Tianxin zhengfa (see 4.6a). Attributed to the Tang worthy Li 
Chunfeng ^ \% M (602-670) and, moreover, to Zhang Daoling, Zhao Sheng, Mao 
Ying IF55, and many other saints, the work also mentions Yuhuang shangdi 3£jl|_h 

(26.4b, 23.13a). The title of Yuhuang was conferred by Zhenzong in 1015, and the 
epithet shangdi was added by Huizong in 1115. Thus while the book may contain some 
old material, it appears to belong to the period under consideration here. 

Taishang zhuguo jiumin zongzhen biyao R Jl R &§ R V& S 

2 fols. + 10 juan 

By Yuan Miaozong preface 1116 

1227 (fasc. 986-987) 

“Secret Essentials of the Most High Principal Zhenren Assisting the Country and 
Saving the People.” The preface by Yuan Miaozong is dated 1 March 1116. It mentions 
the establishment of the Shangqing baolu gong JflUK temple in the capital; 
the construction of the temple began in 1113, and in 1115 it was placed in charge of 
the promotion of priests in the capital (see Song huiyaojigao 1.466). The preface also 
mentions ongoing work on the compilation and editing of a new Taoist canon (ia). 
Yuan Miaozong relates that for more than thirty years he traveled all over the empire, 
asking Taoist masters about their methods and thus obtaining a complete repertoire of 
Taoist methods. For several years he lived in Nanyang H , healing people by means 
of lustral water. Finally he was summoned to the capital, and in 1115 he set to work on 
the collation of the texts of the new canon (preface, ib). He thus had an opportunity 
to examine the entire collection and found that it was deficient in the methods of 
exorcism and healing by means of fu. Thus he compiled these “oral instructions of 
secret praaices [conneaed with] the writing of fu” (Jufa biyong koujue if f# P 
jf£; preface, ib-2a). 







[ io$8 ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 

The book gives a complete and systematic presentation of the methods of the Tian- 
xin zhengfa E'L'IE The first part of the book (juan 1-2) is presented under the 
heading “Shangqing beiji tianxin zhengfa T 4 1 M E E IE ?£ .” It contains the most 
essential elements of the tradition, that is, the fundamental talismans and seals (see 
below, on juan 2). A preface to this part explains the basis and origin of the tradition, 
stating that the methods of the Tianxin zhengfa have their root in the Central Dipper 
at the Northern Pole (Beiji zhongdou 4tt® c f 3 -4, i.e., the Big Dipper that is the Heart 
of Heaven [tianxin]) and that they issue from the Zhengyi tradition. The founding 
of the Tianxin zhengfa as a separate tradition is ascribed to Tan Zixiao and Rao 
Dongtian (1.1a; see 06 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa ); both figures are included in the 
comprehensive list of the pantheon as “transmitters of the teaching” ( chuanjiao fU 
%L), and they are preceded only by Zhang Daoling (2.6a-b). This attribution 

may be compared to 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 43.i6b-i7a, where Jin Yunzhong 
discusses the Tianxin zhengfa in relation to the form of Zhengyi propagated by Zhang 
Daoling. Jin states that Tan and Rao continued the basic fu- tradition— while adapting 
the nomenclature for priesdy tides and the wordings of texts to the worldly models 
(suge {■£[[§) of their time— and that Yuan Miaozong followed their example in editing 
the present book. 

The preface is followed by a section entitled “Quxie yuan qingzhi xingyong ge Id 
IS” (Models for the Practices of Appealing for Restoration, of the 
Department of Exorcism; i.2a-8b). This section contains the programs for the larger 
services of exorcism that may be constructed from the individual rites described in the 
rest of the book, including services for curing illness, for saving deceased ancestors, for 
obtaining succession, and for the destruction of temples for unorthodox deities. The 
Department of Exorcism (Quxie yuan ld?PI%) is the celestial department to which 
the priests of the Tianxin zhengfa are assigned, and in which the ultimate patriarch, 
Zhang Daoling, is instated as commissioner ( [Beiji 4tf!?] Quxie yuan shi ; 

1.2b, 2.6a). It should be noted that .06 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa (preface, ib) uses the 
same title to refer to Rao Dongtian. The department is presided over by the Em- 
peror of the North (Beidi 4^^), who is also referred to as the ancestral master (zushi 
Shangqing dadi J: tj? ; 2.11a; see also 06 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa). He is 

assisted by the “great generals” of the Department of Exorcism, notably, the group of 
thirty-six generals headed by Tianpeng fj ES , that is, the deity corresponding to the 
ninth star of the Dipper (2.11a; 2ia-b; 3.15b). Further down in the hierarchy are the 
generals of the Eastern Peak (Dongyue jjCJK), who lead the ranks of spirit-soldiers 
( yinbing K^E) assisting the priest (2.6b-s>b; see 566 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa , pref- 
ace, ib, where it is said that Rao Dongtian obtained his spirit-soldiers from the 
Lord of the Eastern Peak). 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ ios9 ] 

Juan 2 is presented as the “Douxia lingwen fuzhou (Numinous 

Writ andTalismanic Spells of the Jurisdiction of the Dipper), of the Shangqing beiji tian- 
xin zhengfa. It includes the basic instructions for the writing of fu (2.ioa-i3a, i8b-2ia), 
along with the descriptions of the three fundamental fu — “Tiangang ,” “San- 

guang fu and “Zhenwu or Heisha zhenxing fu (2.13a- 

17a) — and two seals: Beiji quxie yuan yin 4 L IK 4E l?n: EP and Dutian da fazhuyin f[5 
E E li. EP (2.i7a-i8b). It is noteworthy that in a document for a ceremony of ordi- 
nation, Bo Yuchan placed the Thunder methods (wulei fa EfH4£) of the Shenxiao 
tradition and the Tianxin zhengfa on the same level, and he said of the latter, “Tianxin 
transmits three talismans and two seals” (Song Bo zhenren Tuchan quanji 5.411). 

Juan 3 contains a series of fu methods for curing consumption and other kinds 
of illness (3.ia-i5a), followed by a section entitled ‘Tianpeng jiuzhi fa ESHfc'? nfii” 
(Method ofTianpeng for Saving People and Restoring Order; 3.i5a-28b). This section 
describes a method of exorcism related to the group of thirty-six generals headed by 
Tianpeng and based on the recitation of the ancient Tianpeng spell (see 1016 Zhen’gao 
io.iob-ua). Each general is associated with four of the characters of the spell and sum- 
moned by means of a pair of fu. 

Juan 4-6 contain a separate corpus entitled Shangqing yinshu gusui lingwen _h fit 
H (Spinal Numinous Writ of the Hidden Writing of Shangqing). It 
is said to have originated with Zhang Daoling and to have been transmitted by Ye 
Fashan (616-720; see 779 Tang Te zhenren zhuan 292-b). Juan 4 contains the nine 
ancient “Gusui lingwen fu also found in 06 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa 

3.9b-2ia. They constitute the basic text ( benwen $;$£) of the Gusui lingwen and are 
followed in the present book by an additional set of ten fu (juan 5), said to have been 
obtained separately by the author (4.1a). The latter set of fu is connected specifically 
with the method of building prisons in order to capture demons (1 vuyu fa 
5.ia-6a) and with the practice of submitting a document through meditative ascent to 
Heaven (fuzhang {£$; 5.7b-iob). The final part of the Gusui lingwen is the demon 
code (guild ; juan 6), said to be a faithful copy of the original (jiuben H $ ; 4-ia). 

In fact, apart from being shorter, the text of this code corresponds to the version of 
46/ Shangqing gusui lingwen guild , which is presented there as the form of the code 
established by Deng Yougong (see 461 Gusui lingwen guild). 

Juan 7 describes the kaozhao fa (method of inspecting [demons] and sum- 

moning [spirits]). This is an ancient Zhengyi method that is related particularly to the 
generals of the Three Origins (sanyuan jiangjun H 7C W ) and that relies on a sanwu 
kaozhao zhi lu HE% (register of the Three and the Five for inspecting and 

summoning; 7.1a). The version of this method in the present book quotes a Jinsuo liu- 
zhu and in fact most of the material in juan 7 is found, although in a slightly 



1 




[ io6o ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ 1061 ] 



different presentation, in 101s Jinsuo liuzhu yin (see, for instance, the passage citing a 
Zhengyi kaozhao yi IE — 7- 3a-sa, which corresponds to iois Jinsuo liuzhu yin 
4-5a-7b). Note that according to the Song huiyaojigao 1.466, the Taoists living in the 
Shangqing baolu gong were expected to practice the Zhengyi lingwen yusi kaozhao fa 
IE M ^ 5 si In . See also 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa io.9a-b, where it is stated 
that the seal of the Quxie yuan is an essential element of the Zhengyi tradition and of 
the Tianxin zhengfa, and that the kaozhao techniques of the manifold different 
traditions all pertain to the Quxie yuan. 

Juan 8 deals with practices of Pacing the Mainstay ( bugang if'IM )■ It quotes a 
number of passages found in 10 is Jinsuo liuzhu yin, identifying the source simply as 
“the scripture” (jing $?; 8.2b-3a, 4a-b, corresponding to 101s Jinsuo liuzhu yin 2.ia-b, 
i7-7b-8a, 8.nb-i2a). Other parts of this juan comprise standard elements of Zhengyi 
forms of bugang , found in Tang dynasty texts (cf., e.g., 8.sb-6a with 800 Zhengyi chitan 
yi 3b-4a). 

Juan 9-10 contain the models for ritual documents, as well as descriptions of some 
characteristic individual rites of the Tianxin zhengfa, such as, for instance, the li tianyu 
fa iLfWfk (method of erecting a celestial prison; 9.7b-iob); the shengtian tai Tl 
fS. (method of the platform for being bom in Heaven; 9.iob-i2b), a ritual for 
saving members of the family who have died under unfortunate circumstances and 
who, therefore, linger in hell, causing problems to the living; and the xia gan’gaifa T 
IIUsS, a method of obtaining protection for a family for the duration of a year by 
depositing the souls of its members in the Dipper, represented by a fu placed in a jar 
and buried in the earth (9.i2b-i4b). These three methods are all featured as elements 
of the programs for larger services of exorcism, found in the opening part of the book 
(i.2a-8b). 

Poul Andersen 

Shangqing gusui lingwen guilti 

3 juan 

By Rao Dongtian (fl. 994), edited by Deng Yougong f| 5 f=f Ijfj 

(before 1116) 

461 (fasc. 203) 

“Demon Code of the Spinal Numinous Writ of the Shangqing Tradition.” Th tgui- 
lii is the penal code applied in the exorcistic ritual of the Tianxin zhengfa. The 
tide Gusui lingwen is used to designate a special set of nine fu, transmitted 

within the Tianxin zhengfa 5^ 'L' IE life and said to originate with Zhang Daoling 
ill Ht (see s66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa 3.9a-2ia and 1227 Taishang zhuguo jiumin 
zongzhen biyao 4). In the latter work (juan 4-6), the code and the fu are edited to- 
gether, and the whole is presented under the heading Shangqing yinshu gusui lingwen 



His (Spinal Numinous Writ of the Hidden Writing of Shangqing). 

The names of five of the nine fu begin with the term Shangqing (see 566 Shangqing 
tianxin zhengfa 3.13b— 19b). In the present book (preface, 3a), the penal code is said 
to have been edited on the basis of a collation of five versions of the Shangqing code 
{Shangqing guild $LJ|I). Both the texts of the Tianxin zhengfa itself and inde- 

pendent Song dynasty sources concur, however, that the tradition is Zhengyi, and this 
characterization is substantiated by the provenance of a major part of the methods (see 
1227 Zongzhen biyao). Yet in all the texts of the Tianxin zhengfa (and particularly in the 
parts gathered under the heading Gusui lingwen), we find expressions of a nominal 
affiliation to the Shangqing tradition. Most likely these expressions were occasioned 
by a simultaneous devotion to Shangqing practices on the part of the early organizers 
of the Tianxin zhengfa, and in fact the editor of the present book, Deng Yougong, 
presents himself under the chapter headings as “having received the Dadong regis- 
ters of Shangqing and practiced the Tianxin zhengfa JZ'L'JElis? 

It should also be noted that the apparendy somewhat later $67 Shangqing beiji tianxin 
zhengfa actually includes a certain number of Shangqing practices, quoted from 639 
Huangtian shangqing jinque dijun lingshu ziwen shangjing. 

Deng Yougong appears to have lived on Huagai shanljliidl in central Jiangxi, 
which he refers to as his personal mountain ( benshan ^ |1| ) in s66 Shangqing tianxin 
zhengfa (preface, 2b). He seems not to be identical with the man of the same name 
who lived in the same area in 1210-1279 and is mentioned in Quan Song ci 4.2977. In 
S66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa (preface, ib-2a), Deng describes the transmission of the 
texts revealed to Rao Dongtian in 994. He traces the transmission through four 
masters, the last of them, Fu Tianxin ffjsiia, being his own master ( benshi T^ffi). It 
seems impossible to make this line of transmission stretch over a period of more than 
200 years. Furthermore, the informadon contained in his preface to the present book 
seems, rather, to indicate that he was active before 1116. 

In the preface, Deng attributes the creation of the code to Rao Dongtian, the 
founding immortal ( zuxian jfl fill ), identifying its method with the “secret text” ( biwen 
WifU.) unearthed by Rao on Huagai shan. Deng states that Rao, who formerly served 
as a prefectural official, elaborated the code by consulting laws and regulations of 
the worldly administration (preface, 2b; see also 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 43.17a, 
where Jin Yunzhong advances a similar view). It appears that the text was widely 
diffused among the Taoists of northern Jiangxi, because Deng reports that he searched 
for copies in monasteries in Hongzhou ^'J'H (Nanchang), Nankang j^JH (Xingzi), 
on Lushan ll$ [ lj, and in Shuzhou j'H (southwestern corner of Anhui). He says 
that in this way he obtained “five versions of the Shangqing code” (Shangqing guild 
wubu H nil), and that he edited the present version on the basis of a collation of these 
five versions, arranging the entries in accordance with the original form (preface, 3a). 



) 




[ io 62 ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 

Having completed the text he burned it and sent it to the Gold Portal (Jinque ft ) 
of Heaven, whence it was forwarded to the Department of Exorcism (Quxie yuan 
the celestial department to which the priests of the Tianxin zhengfa were 
assigned) and to other places in Heaven. Through the response from Heaven it was 
established that the text did not lack in any respect but was indeed a complete volume 
(preface, 3b). 

Another version of the code is included in 1227 Zongzhen biycw 6 (edited by Yuan 
Miaozong TcfcPcf in 1116), where it is said to be a faithful copy of the original (jiu - 
ben |f$; see 1227 Zongzhen biycw 4.1a). In fact, though lacking certain paragraphs 
(especially the concluding models for ritual documents, some of which are included 
in 1227 Zongzhen biycw 9.ia-7a), the text of this version corresponds exactly to that of 
the present book. The account given by Deng concerning his own procedure implies 
a certain amount of editing and excludes the possibility that he simply extracted the 
work from 1227 Zongzhen biycw. If we believe his account, it follows that the version in 
1227 Zongzhen biycw 6 was derived from the form of the code established through his 
editing, which must therefore have taken place before 1116. It should also be stressed 
that, in connection with the group of fu attached to the “Beidi fu (1227 Zong- 

zhen biycw 2.2ia-b), Yuan Miaozong states that in the original (jiuben) these fu were 
transmitted along with— and not as part of— the Tianxin zhengfa. This statement may 
be compared to s 66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa (preface, 3a), where Deng states that in 
fact he edited the “Beidi fuwen separately. 

It appears that the present book was intended for general circulation. The preface 
has the form of an address to the emperor and ends with a plea that the book be 
promulgated in all parts of the empire. If the majority of the priests practiced ritual 
according to this code, it is explained, evil influences from distant lands and remote 
districts would be averted, and such protection could also be considered a contribu- 
tion to the establishment of imperial rule (preface, 4a). The book is divided into three 
parts, of which only the first, the “Guilu” is in fact a demon code. The second part, 
called “Yuge (Precious Models), contains some regulations for the initiation 

of priests, while the third part, named “Yishi (Hit” (Rituals and Formulas), includes 
both the list of priesdy tides (3.6a-7b) and formulas for ritual documents (3.8a-i9b). 
According to the editor, the material of all three parts, as it was possessed by the com- 
mon priests (sushi ) of the time, was highly inadequate. While these priests often 
preserved some sort of guilii in written form, the yuge were commonly transmitted 
only orally and thej yishi were kept in concealment, with the result that many priests 
lacked especially the material of the two latter categories (preface, ib). The consequent 
low quality of the rituals performed by these priests certainly could not correspond to 
the “intentions of heaven” ( tianyi f:M), according to the editor (preface, 2a). 

Paul Andersen 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ 1063 ] 

Tianxin zhengfa xiuzhen daochang shejiao yi (fc -D IE j£ il 1 # IS Si fH 

12 fols. 

807 (fasc. 566) 

“Ritual for the Display of Offerings, of the Area of the Way for the Cultivation 
of the True [Tao] of the Tianxin Zhengfa.” This work contains, among other things, 
a list of deities that includes the tide of Laozi bestowed in 1013— Hunyuan shangde 
huangdi i'll it _h II! il. (see Xu Zizhi tongjian changbian 81.713 and 770 Hunyuan 

shengji 9-34b-35a)— and the tide of the Jade Emperor bestowed in 1014 (4b; see Xu 
Zizhi tongjian changbian 83.731), the latter apparendy in the expanded form bestowed 
by Huizong in 1116 (see Xu Zizhi tongjian 92.2382). A date no earlier than the twelfth 
century seems indicated also, both by the use of the term Tianxin zhengfa ^'L'jE 
in the tide, apparendy referring to an established tradition, and by the juxtaposition in 
the list of deities of the two departments: Tianshu yuan ^;f|S|?rc and Beiji quxie yuan 
(5a, 6a; compare S 49 Shangqing tianshu yuan huiju bidew zhengfa) . 

A possible context of the ritual lies in the programs for services of exorcism given 
in the main compilations of the methods of the Tianxin zhengfa, for instance, in 1227 
Taishang zhuguo jiumin zongzhen biycw 1. Generally these services conclude with a 
“rewarding of the soldiers” (shangbing H Ji) and, in addition, with a “great offering 
of thanksgiving” (jiaoxie MM or dajiao yi xie K M fJM ), on the day die exorcism has 
worked and calamity has been dispersed (1227 Zongzhen biycw 1.2b). Both this offering 
and the present ritual are said to come at the end of a Retreat (zhai ’M ) of a given 
number of days (2b). This ritual thus fulfills the traditional function of a jiao H, which 
is to accomplish the presentation of offerings at the end of a zhai. An innovation of the 
present ritual that became customary during Song times is that it lacks the initial invi- 
tation of the host of assisting deities (qingguan If ) and addresses itself to the entire 
pantheon, from the supreme deities downward. For die earlier type of ritual, compare 
1212 Jiao sandong zhenwen wufa zhengyi mengwei lu lichengyi by Zhang Wanfu. 

It may be noted that die present ritual opens with the extended form of the weiling 
zhou Ul M /L — derived originally from 330 Taishang dongxuan lingbew zhenwen yaojie 
shangjing 6a-7a— in which the Five Directions are addressed separately. While appar- 
endy absent from the liturgy of Du Guangting, the extended weiling zhou is widely 
current in rituals of the Song dynasty (960-1279); see, for instance, 480 Luotian dajiao 
shejiao yi ia-2b and so 8 Wushang huanglu dazhai lichengyi I7.ib-2b and 32.8b-ioa. 

Poul Andersen 




3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ 106 $ ] 



[ 1064 ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 

Shangqing tianxin zhengfa 

7 juan 

By Deng Yougong not earlier than the mid-twelfth century 

566 (fasc. 318-319) 

“Correct Method of the Heart of Heaven, of the Shangqing Tradition.” The book 
is a compilation of the methods of the Tianxin zhengfa which is referred 

to also simply as zhengfa, with the additional meaning of “method of correcting” that 
is, of impersonating the Way and thereby imposing the correct order on situations 
created by evil influences (cf. 461 Shangqing gusui lingwen guilii, preface, 2a). 

The author appears to have been active around the end of the eleventh century (see 
461 Gusui lingwen guilii). In the preface, he gives a brief account of the history of the 
Tianxin zhengfa, beginning with Rao Dongtian, a scholar in retirement {chushi lM 
± ) living on Huagai shan IjS H [_L| in central Jiangxi. Rao’s biography in 778 Huagai 
shan Fuqiu Wang Guo san zhenjun shishi (j.+b-sb) states that he was a minor official in 
the county of Linchuan j ( [ . The worked/ Gusui lingwen guilii (preface, 2b) confirms 

his status as an official. It is reported that one night in 994, Rao saw a multicolored 
light reaching Heaven from one of the summits; the following morning when he 
dug into the ground at the spot from which the light had shone, he found a bookcase 
containing a set of “the secret formulas of the Heart of Heaven” ( tianxin bishi Tt'L' 
Not yet knowing how to put the rubrical instructions ( juemu j=| ) and the 

Precious Models (yuge EEf&), into practice (i.e., lacking the qualification of a priest), 
he met a divine person who advised him to become a disciple of Tan Zixiao. Tan 
transmitted his teaching to Rao and referred him to the Lord of the Eastern Peak (Tai- 
shan tianqi rensheng di^(J 4 ^^{Lli= ; ff?), from whom Rao obtained soldiers for his 
army of spirits ( yinbing |§k Jx ). Thus equipped with a complete tradition, Rao became 
the founder of the Tianxin zhengfa ( Tianxin cbuzu preface, ia-b). 

On Tan Zixiao, see especially Xin Wudai shi 68.851, Ma Ling’s H t>" Nan Tang 
shu 24.162-63, Lushi Nan Tang shu 17.388-89, and LZIT 43.8a-na. A Taoist from 
Quanzhou, he served the fourth ruler of Min, Wang Chang (r. 935-939), from 
whom he received the title Zhengyi xiansheng IE— zfcjfe.. Tan collaborated with the 
medium Chen Shouyuan vf 7C, who at the court of Wang Chang was raised to the 

status of Heavenly Master and acquired virtual control of the government (see also 
Zizhi tongjian 279.9137). According to Lu You Hjjffj, Chen Shouyuan had found a set 
of fu written on several tens of wooden slips buried in the ground in a bronze bowl. 
Not knowing how to use them, he passed them on to Tan Zixiao, who penetrated 
their mysteries and thereafter declared that he had obtained the Tianxin zhengfa of 
Zhang Daoling (JSjjf He • Lu ends the account by stating that all those who today refer 
themselves to the Tianxin zhengfa consider Tan Zixiao to be the founder of the 
tradition. 



The sources agree that after the fall of Min, Tan went into hiding on Lushan IlM 
ill (northern Jiangxi), where, according to Lu You, he acquired a following of more 
than 100 students (see also Yu Jiaxi, Siku tiyao bianzheng , 846-47). Presumably this is 
the situation underlying the statement in the preface of the present book to the eff ect 
that Rao Dongtian was initiated into the priesthood by Tan Zixiao. The pref- 
ace, however, gives prominence to Huagai shan as the place of origin of the Tianxin 
zhengfa and states that the movement did not appear in the world until the ascendancy 
of the Song dynasty (preface, 2b). Deng refers to Huagai as his personal mountain 
( benshan Zf. [JL| ) and gives a line of transmission of the methods from Rao through four 
otherwise unknown masters to himself (preface, ib-2a). He further mentions the three 
immortals— Fuqiu Liang and his two disciples, Wang Daoxiang iElSiti and 

Guo Daoyi who were supposed to have lived on the mountain toward the 

end of the third or in the beginning of the fourth century a.d. Deng finally refers to 
the Qiaoxian guan Wi f[i| H monastery, the residence of the two disciples (see 778 San 
zhenjun shishi 1-2). The name of the monastery was changed to Chongxian guan 7 k fill 
n by imperial decree in 1075 (778 San zhenjun shishi 2.nb-i3a). 

The implication of Deng Yougong’s use of the earlier name for the monastery, 
namely, that the preface dates before 1075, is consistent with the line of transmis- 
sion described by the author. Yet the text of the book itself shows evidence of a later 
date. The book incorporates material adopted from the Shenxiao tradition, which 
did not emerge until about 1117 (5.8a-9a). Furthermore, the description of a set of fu 
(3.9b-2oa) is said to be copied verbatim from the text edited by the Thirtieth Heavenly 
Master, Zhang Jixian (1092-1126). It seems likely that the preface originally 

belonged to an earlier version of the book. Note also that both in the preface (3a) the 
author states that he had divided the work into two juan, and that a book of the same 
title, but comprising three juan, is listed in the Tongzhi , “Yiwen lire” (VDL 75). It 
would appear that the present seven-juan book is an expanded version, no earlier than 
the middle of the twelfth century, of a work compiled by Deng Yougong toward 
the end of the eleventh century. 

The content of the book is referred to in the preface as “the secret and essential 
fu writs for the four degrees of scriptures and registers” ( sijie jinglu biyao fuwen [ZH 
preface, 3a). The four degrees represent the totality of the early 
Taoist scriptural and liturgical traditions, described in the preface in a short historical 
survey ending with the Shangqing revelations. The preface states that only through 
these revelations were the ritual categories ( kepin on ) established. Deng also credits 
Yang Xi with the transmission of the basic fii-tradition to the world (preface, 2a-b). 
He continues by stating that the tradition of the present book is the only one of the 
major Taoist traditions to have appeared as late as the Song dynasty. Its appearance 
is ascribed to the presence of the Qiaoxian guan on the mountain, a relic of the three 




[ 1066 ] 3 .B .5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 

immortals (cf. the claim in 778 San zhenjun shishi 2.7b that the present book in fact 
represents the teaching transmitted by Fuqiu Liang to his two disciples). The preface 
makes clear that the book was intended for the use of priests initiated into the Tianxin 
zhengfa, and the author states that he had compiled a separate synopsis in three juan 
of the common talismanic usages of contemporary priests: the Beidi fuwen 
meant to be transmitted outside the “correct method” reaching those who practice 
“the precious registers and secret repertories of the four degrees of the three caverns” 
(sandong sijie baolu bipu H rM IS fif H % ; preface, 2b-3a). 

The core of the present book are the fu described in juan 3, the most important of 
which are the three fundamental fir of the Tianxin zhengfa: “Sanguang fu 
“Heisha fix M ” and “Tiangang fu A IF. ?? ” (3-ia-9a; cf. 567 Shangqing beiji tianxin 
zhengfa ra, 6a-i3a, and 1227 Taishang zhuguojiumin zongzhen biyao 2.ioa-i7a, where 
these fu are described in their characteristic combination with the two seals of the 
Tianxin zhengfa). Next in importance come the nine fu referred to as “the spinal numi- 
nous writ” ( Gusui lingwen #§§lf A) and said 
to be transmitted separately by Zhang Daoling 
“iS jjtlH (3-9b-2ia; cf. 1227 Zongzhen biyao 4-6, 
which includes a variant version of the above- 
mentioned nine fu in a more comprehensive 
Gusui lingwen corpus). 

The central deity, acting through the fu, is the 
Emperor of the North (Beidi jVrft), also called 
the Great Emperor of the Northern Pole (Beiji 
dadi Affi A?f?) or the Great Emperor of Su- 
preme Purity (Shangqing dadi and 

commonly referred to as the ancestral master 
{zushi &ji ; 3.17a, 19a, 5.1a; cf. 1227 Zongzhen 
biyao 2.11a, 14b, 2ia-b). The Emperor of the 
North presides over the Department of Exor- 
cism (Quxie yuan that is, the celestial 

department to which the priests of the Tianxin 
zhengfa are assigned (see 461 Shangqing gusui 
lingwen guild, preface, ib). He is the supreme 
commander of the host of “great generals” of 
the department and is often described as be- 
ing guarded by the thirty-six generals headed 
by the “great marshal Tianpeng” (Tianpeng 
figure 52. Talisman of Heisha da yuanshuai A H A 711 Sit ; 2.3a-b, 3.1a, 8b; 

(s66 3.6b) see 1227 Zongzhen biyao). A characteristic agent 




3 .B .5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ 1067 ] 



of the Emperor of the North is the Black Killer (Heisha ® =$(). He is referred to 
as the Pledged Envoy of the Dark Warrior (Xuanwu fushi 2 fj£ ), and he is 
depicted in the Black Killer talisman (“Heisha fu”) as carrying the command ( chi 
$0 of the Emperor of the North (3_5a-7a [fig. 52]; see 220 Wushang xuanyuan san- 
tianyutang dafa 8.i3a-i6a, 27.6b-9b). Note that in the Nan Tang shu 24.162 by Ma 
Ling, the Black Killer is singled out as the deity worshipped by Tan Zixiao (see 
also 128s Tisheng baode zhuan, and Liu Zhiwan, Zhongguo minjian xinyang lunji, 
318-20). 

Besides the fu, the book contains a large variety of individual rites that may be 
used either independendy for curing illnesses and such, or as parts of larger exorcistic 
services (oudines of such services are given in juan 4-5). A large number of these rites 
are identical with those described in 1227 Zongzhen biyao (q.v.). 

Poul Andersen 

Shangqing beiji tianxin zhengfa bill -It 0? A'L'IEji 

37 fols. 

Probably Southern Song (1127-1279) 

567 (fasc. 319) 

“Correct Method of the Heart of Heaven of the Northern Pole, of the Shangqing 
Tradition.” The book belongs to the Tianxin zhengfa AAIEA and thus is related to 
S66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa. The inclusion of the term beiji (Northern Pole) in 
the tide, makes it identical with the tide used as the heading of the first section of 1227 
Taishang zhuguojiumin zongzhen biyao (juan 1-2). Like the present book, this section 
centers on the three fundamental fu of the Tianxin zhengfa. 

The book quotes the Thirtieth Heavenly Master, Zhang Jixian UHfM 9 c (1092-1126; 
ia and 28b-29a; “Zhimi ge fg |1’”), and thus should not be earlier than the Southern 
Song dynasty. One of its parts, the “Huoyao tiangang zhi fa jj§ ® A ie? £. ” (Method 

of the Celestial Mainstay of Animating Brilliance; 23a-26b), is said to have been stored 
in the library of the Taiping guan A 2 ?!! temple on Maoshan 3F [JL| and to have been 
transmitted into the world up to the present by the Black Emperor Immortal (Heidi 
xianren H^flllA; probably Beidi the Emperor of the North and ancestral 

master of the Tianxin zhengfa; see s66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa). 

The book contains a condensed version of the methods of the Tianxin zhengfa. 
From the repertoire of fu it includes only the three most fundamental ones, namely, 
“Tiangang fu A IE jtF “Sanguang fu H ft and “Heisha fu ® ^ ” (6a-i3a). The 

introduction states that formerly the tradition disposed only of these three fu (ia; cf. 
1220 Daofa huiyuan I74.i2b-i3a, where only the practices related to the writing of the 
“Sanguang fu” are recognized as representing the Tianxin zhengfa transmitted from 
Zhang Daoling 55 It )■ 




[ io6S ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 



On the other hand, the book gready develops the system of inner practices ac- 
companying the writing of ffi. It is emphasized that the efficacy of the fu depends on 
the “collection of qi” (quqi IjXH, ) and that the breaths on which the fii of the Tianxin 
zhengfa rely are those of the Three Luminaries (sanguang H ft ), that is, the sun, the 
moon, and the Big Dipper (13a; cf. 1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 6.na-b). The later part 
of the book is taken up mainly by descriptions of methods for the inhalation and in- 
ner circulation of these qi, beginning with a recasting (nb-i9b) of material found in 
630 Huangtian shangqing jinque dijun lingshu ziwen shangjing +a-8b. The following 
three sections— 1 *Taiyang lun A$|§ra” (2ob-2ib), “Taiyin lun AHeSw” (22a-23a), and 
“Tiangang lun A IE Ira ” (23a-29b) — describe techniques related to the liuren A fir and 
dunjia jfj ^ methods for calculating the times and directions for the collection of the 
qi. The final section, ‘Tianxin sanguang zonglun A 'C' A A $8 til” (29b-37a), includes, 
among other things, a list of factors that may cause the fu to be ineffective (3ob-3ia), 
as well as a list of occasions at which lustral water prepared with the “Sanguang fu” 
may be used (33b-3sa). 

Poul Andersen 

Shangqing tianshu yuan huiju bidao zhengfa _L Jlf A HI It: 0 ‘ft ^ it! IE (£ 

3 juan 

Probably late Song (960-1279) 

549 (fasc. 313) 

“True Shangqing Method of Returning by Chariot and Completing the Way Ac- 
cording to the Department of the Celestial Pivot.” The expression huiju bidao 0 ^ If! 
M (returning by chariot and completing the way) is the name of a Shangqing register 
and of a corresponding immortal’s contract ( quan ; cf. 112s Dongxuan lingbao san- 

dong fengdao kejieyingshi 5.2b and 1239 Zhengyi xiuzhen liieyi 18a). These documents are 
related to the final stages in the life of a priest, when he stops performing public ritual 
and retires to the mountains in order to practice the methods of completion ( bifa ^ 
), that is, the Shangqing techniques for the attainment of immortality. According to 
the section “Huiju zhi dao” (The Way of Returning by Chariot) in 1237 Sandong xiudao 
yi 7b-8a, the chariot brings the master to the foot of the mountain and is burned there. 
The master wanders off into the mountain, never to return again. It is said that from 
then on he will practice “the ways of flying ascent of the Latter Saint of the Gold Por- 
tal.” The whole process is referred to as a departure from the manifest world ( chu sanjie 
HjH f?-). The huiju bidao register is mentioned in 777Zhangxian mingsu huanghou shou 
shangqing bifa luji 2b (dated 1024), which commemorates the full ordination of the 
empress dowager in the Shangqing tradition, and in 304-Maoshan zhi 9.8a. According 
to Jin Yunzhong, it was a general register of the Dongzhen section ( 1223 Shangqing 
lingbao dafa 10.10b). 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ 1069 ] 



Surprisingly, the present book, in spite of its title and its purported relation to the 
Shangqing tradition, bears no relation to the above-mentioned practices. It is a manual 
of exorcistic methods, brought together probably around the end of the Song dynasty 
and closely related to the Tianxin zhengfa A'L'IE?£ . The book is distinguished from 
the early texts of this tradition by being affiliated with the Department of the Celestial 
Pivot (Tianshu yuan At® Pit) instead of the usual Department of Exorcism of the 
Northern Pole (Beiji quxie yuan The tradition of the book is defined in 

one place as the Tianxin zhengfa of the Department of the Celestial Pivot (2.1a). The 
distribution of the civil grades (wenjie jCWi ) in these two departments (correspond- 
ing to the celestial South Pole and the North Pole, respectively) is noted in Taishang 
tiantan yuge A_tAfi( At§ (in 1220 Daofa huiyuan 249-50), which also mentions the 
direct connection between the method of the Celestial Pivot (Tianshu fa A t® if ) and 
the “Shangqing register of returning by chariot and completing the way” (249.20a). 

The book contains many elements that confirm its relation to the Tianxin zheng- 
fa. Thus, for instance, one of the seals is the “Dutian da fazhu yin §|5 AAt£ AER” 
(i.4a-sb), which is one of the two basic seals of the Tianxin zhengfa, and the titles of 
two of the ffi— “Heisha shenffi (i.i7a-i8b) and “Tiangang shenffi AS 

ffi ffi” (i.2oa-2ib)— are identical to the titles of two of the three fundamental ffi of 
the Tianxin zhengfa (see 1227 Taishang zhuguo jiumin zongzhen biyao). However, the 
methods of the book generally are much simpler than those of the early texts of the 
Tianxin zhengfa, the only large-scale service included being the one for curing insanity 
(2.7b-i7b). The divine forces called upon in this service are predominantly those of the 
south— for instance, the deities of the celestial South Pole (Nanji ) — and the rite 

of Pacing the Mainstay ( bugang PM) is performed along the stars of the Southern 
Dipper ( Nandou j$j 4 ")- The actual warfare against the demons is carried out by sol- 
diers sent by the local gods of the territory— Siming tudi W] np iffe and Chenghuang 

PI — and there is no appeal to the generals of the Eastern Peak (as in the early texts of 
the Tianxin zhengfa), nor any memorial presented to the supreme Taoist pantheon. 

All of juan 3 is taken up by a description of the practice of presenting a statement 
or a complaint ( touzhuang #t$C)- This practice is to be performed at the beginning 
of the cure for insanity and is found also in the great services of exorcism described 
in the early texts of the Tianxin zhengfa (see, for instance, 1227 Zongzhen biyao 1.2b, 
3b-4a). It is explained in the present book as a method of graphological diagnosis. The 
zhuang JJA is a document written by a representative of the sick person or family. It 
is addressed to the Shangqing tianshu yuan and contains a prayer for help. In answer 
to this prayer, the local Stove God (Zaojun i#ff ) is ordered from above to carry out 
an investigation concerning the category of the evil influences causing illness and to 
disclose this category in the form of the characters as written in the document. The 
priest interprets the document ( yanzhuang fxl/lE) by means of a code, which gives 




[ 1070 ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 

several ways in which each character may be wrong. For instance, a character may be 
stained ( dianwu $[*j rF ) or may be missing a stroke for lack of ink (zhushi it ^). In each 
case, a different kind of evil influence is indicated. 

Poul Andersen 

Wushang xuanyuan santian yutang dafa 

30 juan 

By Lu Shizhong et al.; after 1158 

220 (fasc. 100-104) 

“Great Method of the Jade Hall of the Three Heavens, of the Supreme Mysterious 
Origin.” As explained in the text, the Jade Hall (Yutang IE's;) is formed out of the qi 
at Yujing shan jR [i| and contains the Nine Ancients (jiulao 1.2b). 

The book is a collection of the ritual handbooks that constitute the Yutang dafa 5 
tradition. The tradition was founded by Lu Shizhong (zi Dangke # nj ), 
who is known from many liturgical texts of the Southern Song dynasty (n 27-1279) 
as the True Official Lu (Lu zhenguan jf£ [J| Hf ; see, e.g. , 1307 Haiqiong Bo zhenren yulu 
2.7b, 8b). According to an anecdote in the Tijian zhi (“Bingzhi 13.12.479), 

based on the account of a former schoolmate, Lu came from the county of Shangshui 
[StR in Chenzhou P't'j'N (Henan), where his father, Lu Guan jf§J§!, was the county 
magistrate. He was seventeen years old in the Zhenghe period (1111-1117). Another 
anecdote from the same source (“Dingzhi T * ” 18.1.684), based on the account of a 
nephew ofLu Shizhong, states that Lu Guan was a great-uncle of Lu Shizhong 
and adds that the latter probably obtained his methods in the area of Shu fU . The 
episodes in the adult life of Lu Shizhong, related in the Tijian zhi and carrying 
dates, all take place in the period 1125-1130 (see “Yizhi Z.*,” 6.4.232, 7.1.237-39; and 
“Bingzhi,” 5.5.403-4). He is shown to have been active in widely separated parts of 
China (from Xuzhou (f JH in the north to Jinling in the south) and to have 
been called upon by members of the official class to perform large ceremonies on 
their behalf. In 1125, Lu performed a Yellow Register Offering (huanglu jicu> If H 
H) in Jinling for the repose of the soul of a former vice president of the Board of 
Finance (hubu shilling named Cai Juhou (see Tijian zhi , “Yizhi,” 

6.4.232). 

The present book contains a colophon by Lu Shizhong himself (i.7a-8a). It 
relates specifically to the first part of the book (1-23), “the unsurpassed doctrine in 
twenty- four sections” ( wushang zongzhi ershisi pin “RHpp), which cor- 

responds to the third and highest degree of initiation within the tradition (see 2.6a, 
26.ib-2a, and 28.7a-b). In this colophon, Lu relates that in 1120 he had a nightly vision 
of Zhao Sheng (a disciple of Zhang Daoling iMijtl^), who descended into his 
room and told him about the secret writing ( hishu $$ H) ) he had left behind, buried in 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ 1071 ] 

the ground at Maoshan If [JL| . When Lu served later as assistant prefect ( tongshou (I 
Tp; it should be noted that in fact this title was not officially in use during the Song 
dynasty) in Jinling, he visited the mountain and dug up the scroll. He arranged the text 
in twenty-four sections; in 1126, while staying in Piling (Jiangsu), he transmitted 
it to the world. 

Another colophon is found at the end of the part of the book (juan 26-28) referred 
to as “the seven sections for the initial degree” (chujie qipin f ] BK Z pp ; 26.1b). This 
colophon states that the discursive parts in these seven sections— the so-called “model 
sayings” {gey an j&U ), which are interspersed between the passages of ritual formulas 
and usually begin with the phrase “the master said” ( shiyue (jlf E3 ) — were revealed one 
by one during the first half of 1107, in the form of oral instructions from Heavenly 
Lord Great Master of the Teaching (Da jiaozhu tianjun jzfufjffi )• After this initial 
revelation and up to the year 1119, the actual ritual formulas were transmitted through 
spirit-writing ( jiangbi f^^E); the totality was then copied in 1158. The speech of the 
Heavenly Lord sounded like that of a baby and was audible only to Lu Shizhong 
and his disciple Zhai Ruwen both of whom noted it down (28.7b-8a). Zhai 

Ruwen (zi Gongxun fiH, 1076-1141) was a noted scholar-official, calligrapher, and 
painter (see Songshi 372.11543-45 and the text of his epitaph in his collected writings, 
Zhonghui ji, “fulu pfJii”). He edited a ritual compendium for the huanglu dajiao jSr g| 
f: ft , entided Mengzhenyujian H 9t 3£ , in ten juan and a Jinggong pujiyi jf H 

fH for the Mingyang zhai in three juan (Zhonghui ji, “fulu” 17a): he also made 

several paintings of Taoist deities (Zhonghui ji, “fulu,” 2ia-b). The preface of the first 
work has survived in Zhonghui ji 8.8b— 10a and is also quoted in 308 Wushang huanglu 
dazhai lichengyi 17.29a. It refers to a liturgical style comparable to that of the present 
book. 

The Yutang dafa tradition is defined in the book as the inner secrets (neibi fR % ) of 
the Tianxin zhengfa ^L'lEri (26.1a) and is said to represent the essential method of 
Zhang Daoling: “the fundamental oath between Xuanyuan [i.e., Taishang laojun jy 
JirgH] and the Saindy Master £ JC ® H & if $ W” (1.7b). The Tianxin zhengfa is re- 
ferred to as the “ancestral teaching” (zujiao 2.6a); the oral instructions from the 
Da jiaozhu tianjun (cf. the second colophon, 28.7b-8a) are said to have been obtained 
as elucidations of the teachings of the Tianxin zhengfa (i.5b-6a). The Yutang dafa is 
held to be more fundamental and more meditative, and it is said to have been discov- 
ered, as a result of the above-mentioned oral instructions, that the Tianxin zhengfa 
represented the exorcistic— that is, the “outer”— practices (quxiezhishi of 

the Yutang dafa (1.6a). The link to the ancestral teaching is preserved accordingly, as it 
appears from the book’s exposition of progressive initiation within the tradition (2.6a, 
26.ib-2a). It is stated there that the novice may receive a work entided Tianxin zhengfa 
in ten juan (“in order to support the correct teaching”; 2.6a), and only after having 




[ 1072 ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 

practiced it for three years may he or she ascend to the initial degree of the Yutang 
dafa (26.1b). It is specified in a note that only the edition of the present order ( bentan 
may be used (26.1b). This edition is discussed by Jin Yunzhong in his 1223 
Shangqing lingbao dafa 4j.i7a-b, where he describes it as a revised version, edited by 
Lu Shizhong in the beginning of the Shaoxing period (1131-1162), of the earlier 
compilation by Yuan Miaozong JC th , that is, 1227 Taishang zhuguo jiumin zongzhen 

biyao (dated 1116). 

The connection with the Tianxin zhengfa is borne out by the contents of the pres- 
ent book. The two traditions agree in emphasizing the use of the forces of the Three 
Luminaries (sanguang Ei i.e., the sun, the moon, and the Dipper), for instance, in 
the writing of fu; and indeed the three basic fu of the Tianxin zhengfa (“Sanguang fu 
,” “Heisha fu ® =$ ff ,” “Tiangang fu ^ cf. 1227 Zongzhen biyao 2 . ioa-i7a 

and s66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa 3.ia-9a) are included, with certain variations, in the 
present book. The first of these fu is designated here as “Sanguang zufu 
(Ancestral Talisman of the Three Luminaries), and it is described as “the cornerstone 
of the myriad methods” ( wanfa zhi zong 8.na-i3b, 28.ia-2b). A large pro- 

portion of the exorcistic rites described in the present book are closely related to those 
found in the texts of the Tianxin zhengfa (compare, e.g., the cures for consumption 
in 23.7b-8b and 24.i8a-28a with those given in 1227 Zongzhen biyao 3.ia-4a; compare 
also the method of obtaining protection for a whole year by depositing one’s soul in 
the Dipper [gan’gai fa It H ] in 24.7b-na with 1227 Zongzhen biyao 9.i2b-i4b). The 
major differences are the inclusion of elements of the funeral liturgy and the greater 
emphasis on individual, meditative practice within the Yutang dafa. 

The funeral rites (juan 14-18) constitute elements of the Lingbao dafa 
liturgy, which emerged toward the end of the Northern Song dynasty (960-1127). The 
work 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu 260.1a reports that Lu Shizhong transmitted 
the Lingbao dafa in Jiankang MUf during the Zhenghe period (1111-1117). Jin Yun- 
zhong criticizes the masters of the Yutang dafa school for performing the funeral 
liturgy of the Lingbao categories while holding only Zhengyi tides and registers (see 
1223 Lingbao dafa 10.19b). Jin notes the incorporation of Yutang dafa practices within 
the funeral liturgy of many Dongxuan priests, but opposes this tendency ( 1223 Lingbao 
dafa 20.7b). Regarding the rite of “salvation by sublimation” ( liandu he con- 

siders the method of Lu Shizhong to be somewhat superficial (though not entirely 
worthless), since it relies on the qi of the sun and the moon, instead of those of the tri- 
grams li SI and kan if, for obtaining the True Fire and Tme Water ( 1223 Lingbao dafa 
37.2b-3a). In the present book, however, it is stated (18. ib) that the liandu rite of the 
Lingbao tradition depends on the Yutang dafa tradition for the methods of collecting 
fire and water from the sun and the moon, and that this dependency demonstrates the 
superiority of the tradition of the present book. 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ 1073 ] 

The Yutang dafa is said to be “based on flying high to the sun and the moon” 
(Yutang yi gaoben riyue wei zongzu 0 Li Mm IS; 27.1a). This description 

refers to “the way of flying high” (gaoben zhi dao [lj J^/Zill), that is, the meditative 
technique of ascent to, and internalization of, the qi from the sun and the moon 
(sometimes the Dipper as well). The technique is described in varying degrees of detail 
in juan 4 and 5 and in 27.ia~3a, and again more fully in the separate work 221 Wushang 
santian yutang zhengzong gaoben neijing yushu. It is associated with the “Gaoben zhang 
jUj ^ xpf ” chapter (26) of the Huangting neijing jing ft H! Ll H II , quoted in the pres- 
ent book (4.1b). The commentary of the Huangting jing by Liangqiu Zi jf.fr.f- (fl. 
722), however, identifies the method underlying the Huangting jing as that described 
in 639 Huangtian shangqing jinque dijun lingshu ziwen shangjing (see Huangting neijing 
yujing zhu J§|££F*lft EElf It in 263 Xiuzhen shishu 57.ia-b). This method is similar to, 
but clearly distinct from, the one described in the texts of the Yutang dafa. The latter 
method is not found in any of the extant, early Shangqing material and is appar- 
ently an authentic creation of the Yutang dafa (cf. 43s Taishang yuchen yuyi jielin ben 
riyue tu). 

Poul Andersen 

Wushang santian yutang zhengzong gaoben neijing yushu 

2 juan 

First half of the twelfth century 

221 (fasc. 104-105) 

“Precious Text of Flying High in the Inner Landscape, from the Correct Tradition 
of the Jade Hall of the Supreme Three Heavens.” This text is linked closely with 220 
Wushang xuanyuan santian yutang dafa. The method of flying high is described twice 
in the latter handbook (220 Yutang dafa 4-5 and 27.ia-3a), with a varying amount of 
detail for different degrees of initiation. The 220 Yutang dafa 26.1b, moreover, speaks 
of a more complete description of this method in a book entitled Gaoben yujing jUj^ 
5 If , clearly referring to the present book. We may therefore ascribe the present work 
to Lu Shizhong, the founder of the Yutang dafa 3 i'!i!;AT£, to whom the central 
texts of the tradition were revealed in the 1120s. 

The book describes the inner practices on which the Yutang dafa was founded, the 
“way of flying high” (gaoben zhi dao Bi ; see 220 Yutang dafa). These practices 

consist in methods of meditative ascent to, and internalization of, the qi of the sun, the 
moon, and the Dipper. The purpose of these practices is the individual attainment of 
immortality, and they are also requirements for the performance of the public rituals 
of the Yutang dafa. Juan 1 describes the method of flying high to the sun and the 
moon (gaoben riyue zhi dao 1® ^ 0 H iM )• It is related to the immortals of the sun 




[ 1074 ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 



and the moon (Yuyi Hfii and Jielin and associated with the “Gaoben zhang 
chapter (26) of the Huangting neijing jing ff H F*J JR , which is quoted 
here on 1.1b. The method is similar to, though clearly distinct from, the methods of 
flying high described in early Shangqing texts (cf. 639 Huangtian shcmgqing jinque 
dijun lingshu ziwen shangjing and 1376 Shangqing taishang dijun jiuzhen zhongjing 
2.ia-8b). 

Juan 2, which deals with the Dipper, consists almost entirely of excerpts from early 
Shangqing texts, especially 1331 Dongzben taishang feixing yujing jiuzhen shengxuan 
shangji 4b-8b, 879 Shangqing jinshu yuzi shangjing ja-7a, and 1377 Shangqing taishang 
jiuzhen zhongjing jiangsheng shendan jue 4b-na. All these quotations appear to have 
been culled from the YJQQ. 

Poul Andersen 

Taishang sanyuan feixing guaniin jinshu yulu tu 

8 fols. 

764 (fasc. 534) 

“Illustrated Jade Register of the Most High in Golden Writing of the Three Origins 
for Flying to the Stars and for Wearing [the Stars] and Controlling [the Demons].” On 
Mount Heming $PJi[J_|, Lord Lao transmitted to Zhang Daoling the Jade 

Register written in gold, and he revealed a method, said to be part of the Zhengyi 
teachings, that protected against all calamities. 

This method consists in the adept’s visualization— in several variations and with 
recitation of invocative formulas— of the Five Planets, the seven stars of the Northern 
Dipper, and those of the Three Terraces (santai H ’a ). He or she then “dons” (guan 
M ) these heavenly bodies. After that, the adept should practice the Paces of Yu (yubu 
H or the pace of the Nine Traces ( jiuji bu ) every night. The appropriate 

positions of the feet for these paces are illustrated. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Guandou zhongxiao wulei wuhou bifa H if # S If fit f# ?£ 

15 fols. 

By Wu Sheng ^|#; late fourteenth century 

58s (fasc. 323) 

“Secret Method of the Martial Prince, of the Loyal and Filial Five Thunders Travers- 
ing [the Stars of] the Dipper.” The Martial Prince is Zhuge Liang If (181-234), 
the general of the Three Kingdoms period. The term guandou if if (traversing the 
Dipper) refers both to the presence of the forces of thunder in the stars of the Big 
Dipper, and to the movement of the priest along the stars (as coordinated with the 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ 107s ] 



Luoshu arrangement of the Eight Trigrams), whereby the forces of thunder are 
called forth. 

The author, Wu Sheng from Xuyang Jl!$§ (in northern Jiangxi), defines the tradi- 
tion of the book as the secrets left behind by Zhuge Liang (see postscript, 12b). Ac- 
cording to the preface, the secrets were transmitted to the world in the period Zhiyuan 
(1264-1295), when they were revealed to Zhang Huizhai from Jingmen 

flTjH (Hubei). The latter had acquired a round stone that emitted a bright fight at 
night. When he split open the stone, he found a square slab inside with inscriptions 
on both faces. Having made several hundred rubbings of the inscriptions and burnt 
some of them, Zhang fell asleep. In his dream, Zhuge Liang appeared to him, told 
him that the inscriptions were the divine seals for calling to arms his loyal and filial 
thunder-soldiers ( zhongxiao leibing J^), and gave him the present book. 

Zhang thereupon retired to Wudang shan jib'll' ill, where he studied the Tianxin 
zhengfa. He achieved fame for the efficacy of his ritual, and in the period Dade fi 

(1297-1308) the emperor granted him the title Yinzhen xuanyang zhenren PH [R 
A sanctuary in his honor, established by his disciples after his death, was 
accorded an official tablet with the name Shengzhen guan # yl H . Two years later 
the stone with the inscriptions disappeared into the air with a burst of lightning. The 
seals were recreated by Zhao QuanyangHj^lH (i.e., ZhaoDaoyi £§ 3 li — , the author 
of LZTT), who carved them on date wood and transmitted the method to Huang 
Guyang jf . In 1351, the latter retired to the Western Mountains of Hongdu 
(present-day Nanchang), where he instructed Wu Sheng. Huang died there in 1369. 

The work is a manual describing a form of Five Thunder practices ( wulei fa LlH 
'{f ). The purpose of these practices was “to cure sickness and exorcise demons, to pre- 
serve oneself, and bring peace to one’s household” fife 5 ; 12b). An 

important element of the wulei fa is the block for commanding thunder ( leiting hading 
sssm which corresponds to the stone slab and its reconstruction in date wood 
mentioned in the preface. The block is used for summoning the thunder-soldiers, 
headed by Zhuge Liang and his assistant generals, who descend to the altar from the 
west (5b). The pantheon is characterized by the color white and the forces of metal 
(corresponding to the west). The thunder-block is said to have featured representa- 
tions of the planet Venus on both sides (9a). 

Another important element is the rite of Pacing the Mainstay ( bugang ^7 pj ) 
through the positions of the Eight Trigrams, following the sequence of the numbers 
of the magic square by which the thunder-soldiers are called forth and disposed at the 
eight gates of the ritual area, thus forming the eight battle formations ( bazhen API ; 
3a-4a; see also preface, ia-2b). The incantations are not the same as those accompany- 
ing this pattern in the texts of the Tianxin zhengfa (cf. s 66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa 
5.3a), with the exception of one that opens with the fine “The white qi flows diffusely 




[ 1076 ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 

through my body” (Boqi hundunguan woxing iff?)- This incantation is 

widespread in Song dynasty texts and even in present-day manuals (see, e.g., Ofuchi 
Ninji, Chugokujin no shukyogirei, 242) and more typically accompanies the walk across 
the Dipper, following the arrangement of the stars of the constellation (see, e.g., s 87 
Huangdi taiyi bamen rushi bijue 10b). 

Paul Andersen 

Jinsuo liuzhu yin 

29 juan 

Attributed to Li Chunfeng ^ HI, (602-670) 

1015 (fasc. 631-636) 

“Guide to the Golden Lock and the Moving Pearls.” The present book defines itself 
as an “introductory guide to the practices of Pacing the Mainstay [bugang The 

comprehensive scripture on bugemg was the now lost Jinsuo liuzhu jing 
$$ • The present work both introduces the reader to these practices and demonstrates 
the patterns that should be followed in the performance of the paces (preface, 2a-b, 
i.ib-3b, 41a). It states that one may receive the present guide only after having pos- 
sessed the scripture for a period of three years (28.6b-7a), and indeed the performance 
of the practices described in the book frequendy requires the reference to the scripture. 
Several parts of the practices are either omitted or given in an abridged form (the lat- 
ter is the case for most of the incantations), the reader being referred to the relevant 
section of the scripture. The phrase jinsuo liuzhu (golden lock and moving 

pearls) is explained as an adaptation by the Latter Saint (Housheng 1 ? ) of the earlier 
tide for practices of bugemg: “the methods of walking of the Golden Register” (jinlu 
xingfa jfelSfni). The term jinsm (replacing/m/w #$|) is said to refer specifi- 
cally to the methods by which one strengthens one’s own body, locking the souls into 
their places, whereas the term liuzhu SrLgfc (designating the nine stars of the Dipper) 
is associated with the forms of walking performed to assist the country and save others 
(preface, 7a-b). 

Both compilation of the book and the commentaries are attributed to Li Chun- 
feng, the famous astronomer with Taoist leanings who held the office of Grand 
Astrologer {taishi ling u ) during the Zhenguan period (627-649; biographies 
in Jiu Tang shu 79.2717-19 and Xin Tang shu 204.5798). The content of the book, 
however, affords grounds for doubting this attribution. In 2i.4a-b, the author re- 
lates that in 617 the Latter Saint (i.e., Laozi) descended on Zhongnan shan j^j 
[i| , announced to Li Chunfeng that the Li family would presendy establish the Tang 
dynasty, and directed Li in writing a synopsis of the Ershiba xiu jing 
(in the celesdal version consisting of twelve juan), that is, the divination technique 
occupying the rest of juan 21 (see Song shi 206.5232, where a Shangxiang ershiba xiu 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ 1077 ] 

zuanyao jue i n one j uan is included in the list of works by Li 

Chunfeng). 

This version of the announcement of the mandate is related to various other ac- 
counts, occurring in texts dating from the late Tang dynasty (618-907) to the Northern 
Song (960-1127), none of which make any mention of Li Chunfeng. See, for instance, 
Tang huiyao 50.865, S 9 i Luyiji 5.5b-6a and S 93 Lidai chongdao ji 4a-5b (both by Du 
Guangting), and 774 Youlong zhuan 5.ua-i4b (dated between 1086 and 1101). The 
account of the announcement of the mandate found in the latter text is said to be 
culled from a national history Guoshi pH and it is repeated, with variations, in 770 
Hunyuan shengji 8.4b-8a (dated 1191) by Xie Shouhao, who gives a Tang shu fif H 
as his source. Xie, however, adds the story concerning Li Chunfeng, giving a Jinsm 
liuzhu as his source ( 770 Hunyuan shengji 8.2b; cf. 1.37a, where the title is rendered as 
Jinsm liuzhu ji |H)- Thus it would appear that the association of Li Chunfeng with the 
announcement of the mandate of the Tang dynasty derives from the present work. If 
the book existed earlier, it did not come to the attention of the hagiographers before 
the twelfth century. 

The Jinsm liuzhu is cited in several Song dynasty (960-1279) texts (e.g., 1226 Daomen 
tongjiao biyongji 7.nb-i2a; note that the citation in the Tang 464 Zhaijie lu 7a, though 
corresponding to a commentary in the present book [24.5b] is identified as deriving 
from the original classic , Jinsm liuzhu jing). It appears to have circulated particularly 
among the followers of the Zhengyi tradition, and it was clearly used as a source for 
the compilation of the books of the Tianxin zhengfa ^>L'IE Thus the description 

of the kaozhaofa (method of inspecting [demons] and summoning [spirits]) 

included in 1227 Taishang zhugmjiumin zongzhen biyao 7.ia-6b (dated 1116) is quoted 
from a Jinsm liuzhu and appears as a reworking of passages found in the present book 
(cf. 28.6b, 7.2b-3a, 28.5b, 4.7b-8b, 5a-7b, and 7.3b-4b). Likewise, the passages on bu- 
gang found in 1227 Zongzhen biyao 8.2b-4b correspond to 2.ia-b, i7.6a-b, 7b-8a, and 
8.ub-i2a of the present book. An important difference between the two versions of 
the kaozhaofa is found in a passage defining the tradition practiced. The 1227 Zongzhen 
biyao 7.4a states simply that the priest “practices according to the celestial code” ( yi tian- 
ke xingfa while the present book adds that in so doing he practices the 

Tianxin zhengyi zhifa AAiE — A (4.6a). The occurrence of this phrase suggests 
that it was composed after the origin of the Tianxin zhengfa movement in the 930s 
(see s 66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa and 1227 Zongzhen biyao). However, the phrase does 
not seem to be part of the original version of the Jinsm liuzhu , from which 1227 Zong- 
zhen biyao quotes. It seems unlikely that Yuan Miaozong who compiled and 

edited 1227 Zongzhen biyao in an effort to promote the methods of the Tianxin zhengfa, 
would have suppressed the mention of this tradition had it been found in his source. 
It may be suspected that the phrase is a late addition to the existing copy of the book 



[ 1 078 ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 



3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites [ 1079 ] 



(so much the more since it is the only reference to the Tianxin zhengfa; the kaozhaofa 
is defined throughout the book simply as a Zhengyi method). 

It may be added that the content of the present book clearly seems to represent a 
layer of the Zhengyi tradition that is prior to the origin of the Tianxin zhengfa. The 
book contains a large amount of material related to the methods mentioned in early 
Zhengyi texts. Note, for instance, the visualization practices and forms of bugang 
associated with the generals of the Three Origins (sanyuan jiangjun E%| f^ig) and 
described in juan 5-9 (cf. 1208 Taishang sanwu zhengyi mengwei lu i.i2b-i5a). Also the 
tradition of the book is referred to as the method of the Three and the Five {sanwu 
zhifa ir.fi preface, 2a; Tia-jb), and note that a characteristic title of a Zheng- 
yi priest, widely used in early texts, defines him as a zhenren of Primordial Destiny 
Pacing the Mainstay of the Three and the Five of the Red Heaven ( chitian stmwu 
bugtmg yutmming zhenren A; scc6is Chisong zi zhtmgli 2.22b). 

Moreover, nowhere in this material do we find any reflection of the typical Tianxin 
zhengfa reforms of the Zhengyi tradition. Thus, for instance, the Department of Exor- 
cism (Quxie yuan IKflif^;) and die title of the first Heavenly Master (Zhang Daoling 
as commissioner of that department {Quxie yuan shi fig; see 1227 Zongzhen 
biyao 2.6a) are absent from the present book, as are the army of spirit-soldiers {yinbing 
(ig ) of the Eastern Peak (see s66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa). 

In a note on the dating of the book, T. H. Barrett points to a possible reference to 
the An Lushan Rebellion (2s.i6a-b), as well as to the mention of the Tibetan threat, 
which was a major concern especially during the reign of Daizong (763-779) and 
which lasted until the middle of the ninth century (15.1b; see Barrett, “Towards a 
date”). This would suggest a date some time in the late Tang (618-907) or the Five 
Dynasties (907-960). [Editorial note: On the placement of this article in the present 
section, see the introduction to part 3.B.5 above.] 

The preface, attributed to Li Chunfeng, describes the transmission of the book into 
the world. The main revelatory deity is the Latter Saint, who is defined as a separate 
manifestation ( fenshen fj ) of Lord Lao. He is said to have been incarnated as Laozi, 
later to be instated as the Jade Emperor (ia-2b). The Latter Saint transmitted the tra- 
dition to Yin Xi filK, Zhang Daoling, and Wang Yuan JH, among others (2b-3a). 
Wang Yuan was ordered to transmit it further to Mao Ying who instructed 
the founders of the Shangqing tradition— including Yang Xi and the two Xu— in 
its use (5b-6a). The preface adds that the present book transmits the teachings of the 
Former Saint (Qiansheng f}fj I=? ; i.e., Taishang daojun), as well as those of the Latter 
Saint. The book is said to result from a combination and codification of the sayings 
of both figures, distinguished in the original version by writing in black and red ink, 
respectively, with the addition of oral instructions received from the Latter Saint by 
Zhang Daoling and Wang Yuan (6a-b). 



In juan 3 the revelation of the tradition from the Latter Saint to Zhang Daoling is 
described, and it is said that in this connection the Latter Saint introduced the term 
Zhengyi for the totality of the methods (3.2b, 4b, 5b). The tradition is said to be di- 
vided into three levels: Shangqing (in some places conceived as the teachings of the 
Former Saint, Taishang daojun, see 3.6b); Zhengyi proper; and the Five Methods 
(wufa fi : (f ), which are related to the five fu of the Lingbao tradition (3.4b-5a; cf. 1240 
Dongxuan lingbao daoshi shou sandong jingjie falu zeri li 5a— b). These statements (as 
well as those of the preface) accord with the attempt manifested in the book to create 
a synthesis of the methods of bugang of the Shangqing and Zhengyi traditions. 

Generally, bugang is described here as being performed in a series of variations (see, 
e.g., 22.7a-b): (1) “treading along the Terrestrial Sequence” (nie diji here 

the Dipper, Beidou is conceived as consisting of seven stars); (2) “flying along 
the Celestial Mainstay” ( fei tiangang here the Dipper is referred to as the 

Central Dipper, Zhongdou and conceived as consisting of nine stars); (3) the 
Paces of Yu ( Tabu H Pf ) ; (4) the practice of covering one’s body with the stars of the 
Dipper (peiyi §Efi); and (5) the sending forth of the forces of die Dipper by means 
of the twirling method ( nianjue ). A frequent term for the latter practice is zhuan 
tianguan If fi ifj (revolving the Gate of Heaven, i.e., pointing the seventh star of the 
Dipper in the direction of the evil influences). 

This system clearly reflects the concepts and terminology of the early Shangqing 
scriptures on bugang (see 1316 Dongzhen shangqing taiwei dijun bu tiangang fei diji 
jinjianyuzi shangjing). In fact, the present book incorporates a good deal of material 
derived from these scriptures. Thus a central passage from 1316 Bu tiangang jing (8a-b), 
describing the effects of performing the practice, is constantly repeated and elaborated 
upon (1.2b, 9b-ioa, 15.4a). Yet the tenor of the book, with its emphasis on exorcistic 
and other ritual applications of bugang , is representative of the later Zhengyi rites. It 
may be noted in this connection that the author strongly criticizes the practice of retir- 
ing to the mountains in order to seek exclusively personal salvation (3.6a, 7.1a, 12.8b). 
This practice is connected with Buddhism and with the concrete and overt accumula- 
tion of merit ( yanggong |£|§ Xjj ) through, for instance, the construction of temples, the 
fabrication of images, and the work of charity (i9.8b-iob). Though positive in its own 
way, yanggong is said to be infinitely inferior to the intangible and hidden accumula- 
tion of merit ( yingong ) practiced by Taoist priests, whose ritual activity benefits 

all human beings and— while it relies on secret, inner practice— must be carried out 
among human beings (17.1a-19.8b). 

Paul Andersen 




[ ioSo ] 3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites 



1 



Lingshu zhouhou chao 

yb 6fols - 

Song (960-1279)? 

1279 (fasc. 1004) 

^ “Breviary of the Numinous Writings.” This work 

Hjj is a collection of summary descriptions of various 
exorcistic techniques, probably of the Song dynasty. 
The term lingshu Mi? is commonly used to designate 
fu traditions such as the True Writs ( zhenwen R ^ ) of 
the Lingbao tradition and the “method of attracting 
and summoning” (shezhao fa Met if) used within 
^ the funeral liturgy of the Lingbao dafa ft Jgf f: for 

summoning the soul of the deceased (see 466 Lingbao 
ling jiao jidu jinsbu 26o.ia-28b). The present work, 
figure 53- Portrait of Laozi however, contains only methods for the living (some 

as Undifferentiated Beginning of which are designed to form part of jiao services) 

(1277 1.4a). Ming reprint of 1598. ilnd at least the lnitlaJ sectlon is clearl rclated to ^ 

Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 7U , , J 

nationale de France. (Chinois Zhen gy ] mcthod of inspecting and summoning (kao- 
9546/1259) zhaofa % ; ia-2a; cf. 1227 Taishang zhuguojiumin 

zongzhen biyao). The work begins with a description 
of practices of extemalization of the Generals of the 
Three Origins (sanyuan jiangjun Ip), and it continues with some references 

to the legend of Zhao Rui , the patriarch of the kaozhao fa (cf. 101s Jinsuo liuzhu 

yin n.2a-b and 23.8a-b). It may be noted that a Sanyuan zhouhou lingshu 
W is quoted in 101$ Jinsuo liuzhu yin 6.5b for some information on the extemalization 
of the sanyuan jiangjun. 

Poul Andersen 



rJmim 



Daofa zongzhi tu yanyi u? h HI fr I 
2 juan 

By Deng Nan , zi Yizheng If IE , hao Tieyai zi li? T , and Zhang Xixian Ipi 
# H , hao Yangwu j| If ; preface dated 1299 
1277 (fasc. 1004) 

“Fundamental Principles of Taoist Rites Illustrated and Explained.” This text offers 
a lay person’s introduction the underlying philosophy ofThunder rites (leifa ffjg). 

Of the authors, only Zhang Xixian is mentioned. He is referred to as a canxue 
■P (administrator) of the prefectural academy of Linchuan Kg|[[ in Jiangxi. He is the 
author of the explanations. Deng Nan drew the illustrations and may have been a 
daoshi (see fig. 53). 



3.B.6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites [ 1081 ] 



Among the prefatory matter, the first text, dated 1308, is by the Thirty-eighth Heav- 
enly Master, Zhang Yucai ’tS JH (d. 1316). It expresses the patriarch’s admiration for 

the fact that Zhang Xixian managed to unite the teachings of the Three Teachings 
into a coherent discourse. Next comes Zhang’s own preface, dated 1299, followed by 
a shorter one by Wang Wanqing EE M (hao Kongxuan zi E 5 j^-p), dated 1304. A 
concluding note by the author gives an account of the miraculous feats attributed to 
Kongxuan zi. It relates that one of Wang’s student made his teacher’s portrait shortly 
after his death in 1308. This act moved the sage to return to life. He thereupon wrote 
a last poem of farewell, burst out laughing, threw the brush away, and then died again. 
He was, however, seen about in Fujian until 1330. 

The first juan of the work is devoted to cosmology in the Three Teachings dis- 
course; this juan considers the works of Han Yu (768-824) and other Confu- 
cian worthies and evolves toward the theory of leifa, quoting Wang Wenqing IE EG® 

(1093-1153; 2.11b). 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Singling 



3.B.6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites 

The name of Shenxiao U (Divine Empyrean) for the supreme Heaven situated 
above the traditional pantheon is supposed to have been introduced by Lin Lingsu, 
a court Taoist in the later period of the reign of Song Zhenzong (997-1022). Both 
the official histories (Song shi 462) and Taoist hagiography (LZTT 53.ia-i6a) report 
that Lin was invited to court in the beginning of the Zhenghe period (1111-1118), at 
which time he had said: “In Heaven there are nine supreme [spheres], of which the 
Jade Purity Divine Empyrean [Shenxiao yuqing ffpWsEilt] is the highest. . . . The 
sovereign there is the eldest son of the Highest Ancestor [Shangdi _h ^ ]. He presides 
over the South, and his name is the Great Sovereign of Long Life [Changsheng dadi 
Your majesty is he.” Following Lin’s visit, the emperor assumed the tide 
Lord of the Tao (Daojun xSH), and all over the empire temples were erected in his 
honor. They were called Palaces for the Longevity of the Divine Empyrean (Shenxiao 
wanshou gong WUitl S? Is? ). Many other members of the imperial family were also 
identified as divine beings, and received Shenxiao registers ( Shenxiao bilu l&IS) 

in confirmation. Lin Lingsu is credited with having been versed in the Five Thun- 
der rites ( wulei fa E 'SI ) that enabled him to summon rain. At the capital, he also 
conducted zhai j§f services on a grand scale for the salvation of the dead. 

Among the many texts on Shenxiao rites and the Shenxiao pantheon preserved in 



[ io 82 ] 3 .B .6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites 



3 .B .6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites [ 1083 ] 



the Daozang , none can be attributed directly to Lin Lingsu himself or dated to the 
time when he was active (until 1116). The only work that bears his name is a song titled 
“Jinhuo handing shenxiao sanqi huoling gc fzkkf 1220 Dao- 

fa huiyuan i99.ia-5b, which is certainly spurious. Even the creation of an additional 
Shenxiao pantheon on top of the traditional one cannot with certainty be ascribed 
to him. Yet the fact that this addition occurred during the Song period (960-1279) is 
significant. The deities of the Shenxiao pantheon, which got its final form much later, 
all preside over, or play a role in, different kinds of rites (fa jfe ), in contrast to the 
more abstract and general pantheon headed by the Three Pure Ones. Great numbers 
of popular deities were enrolled as agents of the exorcist Thunder rites and were as- 
signed to the new organizations of the heavenly government, such as the Ministry of 
North Apex of the Expulsion of Evil Forces ( Beiji quxieyuan 4 Lffi!§§ 

The Shenxiao rites also became part of the services for the salvation of the souls of 
the dead, especially the Orphan Souls (guhun of those who died an unnatural or 

violent death. The ritual of feeding these suffering souls followed the Buddhist prac- 
tice of the Avalambana ritual, but Taoism added extensive rites for healing the dead of 
their diseases and injuries and then refining their substance in order to transform them 
into immortals (liandu This ritual became the prominent form of liturgy. 

Lin Lingsu’s successor at Huizong’s court was Wang Jun 3: fit (or Wang Wen- 
qing 1093-1153). Although it is said that Wang was recommended by Lin, 

there is no proof that the two men were connected or that Wang was Lin’s disciple. 
Wang was also famous for his Five Thunder rites ( wuleifa E!f?£) of the Shenxiao 
pantheon. Several texts state that Wang obtained his art from the fire master ( huoshi 
ik. ) Wang Zihua (I -f Ijl of the Tang dynasty (618-907). Wang Wenqing is the au- 
thor of a number of treatises on leifa Sf : {f . Some of his disciples are also known. The 
lineage extended well into the Southern Song (1127-1279) period, especially in South 
China, the native region of both Lin Lingsu and Wang Wenqing. 

The Shenxiao rites as we know them from the Daozang, however, all seem to have 
passed through the hands of Bo Yuchan. Bo also greatly enhanced and enlarged 
the Shenxiao legacy. He called himself the Little Clerk of the Divine Empyrean (shen- 
xiao sanli ) as a sign of his devotion to this tradition. Under his direct or 

posthumous patronage, the Five Thunder rites thrived, and in the commentary of the 
Jade Pillar scripture (see below), more than 200 kinds of thunder are enumerated (see 
16 Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzunyushu baojing). 

It was probably Bo Yuchan who introduced Jiutian yingyuan leishen puhua tian- 
zun as an addition to the Shenxiao pantheon. This deity 

was the revealer of the Scripture of the Jade Pivot (16 Jiutian yingyuan leish eng puhua 
tianzun yushu baojing), a work that became the canon of the Thunder rites. Formed 
after the model of the Buddhist Samantabhadra, the Puhua tianzun represents the 



esoteric practice of the thunder (vajra) in all its aspects; he represents life, and thus 
the life-giving rites, in contrast to the Taiyi jiuku tianzun the master 

of death. The Puhua tianzun, the Jiuku tianzin, and the Nanji Changsheng dadi j^j 
introduced by Lin Lingsu are the three major deities of the Shenxiao 
pantheon of the Nine Sovereigns (jiuchen fi'Sx), in complement, but not superior, 
to the traditional Nine Majesties (jiuyu fi'M) headed by the Three Pure Ones. In this 
way, the new exorcistic rites became fully integrated into the Taoist liturgy. The dual 
pantheon, moreover, gave a theological foundation to the separation of the liturgy 
into rituals for the living and rituals for the dead. Both forms of ritual are represented 
in the Shenxiao fa, which enlarged substantially the importance of 1 Lingbao wuliang 
duren shangpin miaojing by creating the sixty-chapter version that now stands at the 
beginning of the Daozang. The dual pantheon also integrated a vast number of popu- 
lar demon-quelling spirits, the rites of whom have been preserved in 1166 Fahaiyizhu 
and 1220 Daofa huiyuan (the article concerning this large collection of texts has been 
placed in part 3.B.7, on the Qingwei '(nffll school). 

Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing Wi If M M ® A ll uu fel' 

61 juan 

After 1112 

1 (fasc. 1-13) 

“Wonderful Superior Book of Immeasurable Salvation from [the Canon of] the 
Marvelous Jewel.” This version of the Duren jing includes the original fourth-century 
text (juan 1, pages isa-i6a and i8a-2ob, however, do not belong to the original work; 
see section i.B.3.a) plus sixty juan that were added after 1112, probably by Lin Ling- 
su. This date is provided by 1282 Gaoshang shenxiao zongshi shoujing shi ib, where the 
revelation of the Lingbao zhenjing M Jf (X IM is announced “after the year renehen of 
the Zhenghe era [1112].” The same text then gives (2b-4b) the content of a Gaoshang 
shenxiao taishang dongxhuan lingbao duren jing in sixty-one juan, which corresponds 
indeed to the content of the present work. The new Duren jing that consequently 
belonged to the Shenxiao scriptures (the term shenxiao is found all through the text 
on pages 22.12a, 40.17b, etc.) was to be considered on the same level with the Tong- 
zhen M yt scriptures (1282 Shoujing shi 4b), which may be the reason this Duren jing 
is placed at the head of the Taoist canon. 

The title Changsheng dadi jun M in juan 31 refers to Emperor Huizong 

(r. 1100-1125). The arrangement of the sixty additional juan could well correspond to 
a sixty-day cycle of recitations. At the same time, these sixty juan represent a journey 
descending from the Great Tao to the hells, and ending with “the eternal cessation of 
reincarnation.” 

The form of each juan is identical and is patterned upon the ancient Duren jing , 




[ io 84 ] 3.B.6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites 



3.B.6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites [ roSs ] 



but each juan also presents itself as a statement on a distinct practice, sometimes in- 
cluding symbols (fu ff). Occasionally, interesting ritual (3.13a— b) or cosmological 
(4o.4-b-5a) indications are found. The frequent use of the alchemical term zhentu [Jt 
± (True Earth; 13.3b, 31.6b, 52.3b, etc.) is noteworthy, as is the occurrence of phrases 
that were to become key expressions in the Lingbao dafa: “causing zhenren to descend 
and marshaling the spirits” ( jiangzhen zhaoling R S ® ; tide of juan 23) and “silent 
audience of the supreme god” ( mochcw shangdi If Id _h "Sr ; 31.6a). It may be noted 
that Beiji dadi is said to have taught Mingwei BfJM (i.e., Mengwei HJcE) 

zhenren an exorcistic method linked to the Beidou seven stars (37.13b). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Strickmann, “The longest Taoist scripture.” 

John Lagerwey 

Yuanshi wuliang duren shangpin miaojing zhiyin 

23 fols. 

2 (fasc. 13) 

“True Sounds of the Wonderful Scripture of the Primordial Beginning on Universal 
Salvation.” This text contains the phonetic glosses— the correct sounds (zhiyin fig 1 ) 
of the title— for the recitation of the sixty-one juan of / Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin 
miaojing (cf. Strickmann, “The longest Taoist scripture,” 341). 

John Lagerwey 

Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing futu 

3 juan 

Preface attributed to Emperor Huizong of the Song (r. 1100-1125) 

147 (fasc. 67) 

“Fu and Charts of the Book of Salvation.” This text, a kind of commentary on the 
Duren jing, is one of the Shenxiao writings (Strickmann, ‘The longest Taoist 
scripture,” 344-46). Strickmann suggests that the reference in the preface attributed 
to Huizong (2b) to the “elimination of heterodox methods and the flourishing of 
the True Way” in the years renchen and gengzi j^f-p (1112 and 1120) may refer 
to the persecution of Buddhism under Huizong. It should be pointed out, however, 
that the attribution of the preface is open to question: it is neither signed nor dated, 
and the author refers to himself by using not the imperial zhen but the ordinary 
wo fjc- 



Strickmann also mentions the cosmic charts found both in this text (2.5b, 3.4b-sb) 
and in 1219 Gaoshang shenxiao yuqing zhenwang zishu dafa (2.18b, 2b-3a). These and 
other elements of the Shenxiao movement were to become standard features of the 
later Lingbao dafa method: all its basic fu, and such key practices as the liandu 
(3.6a-b; 1219 Zishu dafa 11.30b) and the yuangang liuyan 7eKB| lift ?ff (3.16a; 1219 Zishu 
dafa 1.19b) are already found, or at least mentioned, in these Shenxiao texts. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Strickmann, “The longest Taoist scripture.” 

John Lagerwey 

Gaoshang shenxiao zongshi shoujing shi h Pt 1 M x If 

7 fols. 

Southern Song (1127-1279) ? 

1282 (fasc. 1005) 

“Protocol of the Reception of the Scriptures of the Patriarch of the Highest Divine 
Empyrean.” This work is an introduction to the revelation of 1 Lingbao wuliang duren 
shangpin miaojing, that is, the Song version of the Book of Salvation in sixty-one juan 
(see part 3.B.1). The present work tells the story of the revelation of the text by the Wor- 
thy of the Primordial Beginning (Yuanshi zhi zun and of its transmission, 

first to Yuchen taishang daojun T. Ss Jv _h ; ft and then from the latter to the True 

King (Shenxiao Yuqing zhenwang Pf I ff Ti), divine patriarch of the Shenxiao 

order. The latter figure— after having entrusted his younger brother, the Qing- 
hua dijun if IP'S? It, with his functions in Heaven— descended to Earth in order to 
become the ruler of humankind, that is to say, Emperor Song Huizong (r. 1100-1125). 
In conjunction with this divine reign, in the year renchen of the Zhenghe era (1012), 
the great Book of Salvation was revealed, and with it the register that empowered its 
possession, the Gaoshan shenxiao yuqing milu i=i in three juan. 

The present work contains the complete list of titles of the sixty-one chapters of 
this version of the Book of Salvation (2b-4a); then it presents the register and other 
divine works revealed by the divine redeemer Emperor Huizong, or compiled under 
his auspices: the imperial commentaries on the Daode jing j|t f§jj f § and the Zhuangzi, 
the hymns and hagiographies written by him or under his direction, and finally the 
editing of the Taoist canon (sa-6b). The work ends with a short presentation of the 
ordination regulations and degrees pertaining to the Shenxiao order. 

Although there is some historical foundation for a relation between certain ele- 
ments of the Taoist theocracy of Huizong and the Shenxiao revelations, it is obvious 
that the present work is an attempt to muster the emperor’s patronage for the order 
as it developed in later times. The simple reference throughout the text to “Song Hui- 




[ io86 ] 3 .B .6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites 



3 .B .6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites [ 1087 ] 



zong” indicates that it could not have been written during the emperor’s reign. The 
Shenxiao rituals became popular in Southern Song times, and the present work must 
have been written in connection with this late development. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Strickmann, “The longest Taoist scripture.” 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 

Taishang sanshiliu bu zunjing A _h H A A 311 @ IS 

6 juan 

8 (fasc. 18-19) 

“Venerable Scripture of the Most High in Thirty-six Sections.” According to the 
author of 4 Wushang neibi zhenzang jing (4.1b), a scripture of this tide had been writ- 
ten to demonstrate that the Taoist books of the Six Dynasties (220-589), divided into 
Three Caverns of twelve sections each, had been superseded by a new literature. The 
present book is the summary of that literature. Just before giving a list of the thirty-six 
sections, 4 Zhenzang jing attacks the “ignorant” who divide Taoist books into such 
sections without realizing that “all beings alike constitute the matter of scripture” (cf. 
1221 Shangqing lingbao dafa 54.5b-7a). In similar fashion, 9 Taishang yicheng haikong 
zhizang jing criticizes those “poor Taoists who, failing to understand my meaning, 
preach the scriptures of the Three Caverns in thirty-six sections and, on the basis of 
these texts, develop a spirit of certitude” (io.8b-9a). 

A certain number of passages in the present text are virtually identical to passages 
in 9 Haikong jing (for example, i.i2a-b and 6.i5a-b here correspond to 7.i4a-b and 
7.nb-i2a, respectively, in the latter). In another parallel passage, the two texts refer 
in complementary fashion to the early Heavenly Master movement: according to 9 
Haikong jing (7.i6b-i7a), the “powerful spirits [guishen MW] of the five roads” lost 
the Way because of four demons (mo M); here (2.6b-7b) they are said to have lost the 
Way because they had recourse to libationers (Jijiu fg ). The number and the nature 
of such parallel passages suggest that these two texts were written, if not by the same 
author(s), at least at the same time and in the same place. 

Other elements, however, suggest a much later date. Most notably, a certain num- 
ber of probably Northern Song (960-1127) practices are mentioned: the methods of 
the Four Saints ( sisheng HU) and of the Heart of Heaven (tianxin A'Ls 6.6b); a 
ritual of the Eleven Luminaries ( yao Hg , 3.12a); and a series of thirty-six fu to be used 
in conjunction with 318 Dongxuan lingbao ziranjiutian shengshen zhang jing in rituals 
for the salvation of the souls of the dead. The notion that the practice of returning the 
elixir can harm both nature and life (xingming tttrrf ; 5.12a) also seems to point to the 
Song period. 



The presence of these elements in the text suggests that it was written in the 
Northern Song and made to correspond to the table of contents of 4 Zhenzang jing. 
Ideologically, it is, nonetheless, close to the scriptures of early Tang Taoist monasti- 
cism. 

John Lagerwey 

Mingzhen powang zhangsong RJj fi ® IS 

7 fols. 

By Zhang Jixian MM 9 c, hao Xujing zhenren IS S it A , the Thirtieth Heavenly 

Master (1092-1126) 

979 (fasc. 615) 

“Stanzas of Understanding Truth and Refuting Error.” This text contains a series 
of forty-three didactic, four-line, seven-syllable poems on ritual, mainly liandu M M 
and Thunder rites. For the expression mingzhen R in the title, compare the poem 
on page 6a: “Dang mingzhen yao 'U ^ R .” The 1220 Daofa huiyuan 71 reproduces 
the present text under the title Xujing tianshi powang zhang />M M A ® liAl? This 

version has one additional poem (on 7a), entitled “Sanjiao yili IS,” and several 

variant titles. 

The work is not mentioned in Zhang Jixian’s extant biographies, nor is it included 
in 1249 Sanshi dai tianshiXujing zhenjunyulu. It appears to have been considered spuri- 
ous already at an early date. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taiqing yusi zuoyuan biyao shangfa A fit A iM A fire ^ A iA 

12 fols. 

By Xiaying filft, hao Dongshan zhenren (R 1 lil R A 

1247 (fasc. 991) 

“Secret, Essential, and Superior Methods from the Left Hall of the Highest Purity 
Jade Office.” This is a short manual for exorcism (kaozhaofa ASIA; see page 8b). As 
the name of the author does not appear to be complete, he may be tentatively identi- 
fied as Li Yingxin $ Uj£ 0 T , hao Dongxuan zhenren, a patriarch of the hundun xuanmen 
dafa (S Mi A PP A if , a Thunder magic (leifa U ) in 1220 Daofa huiyuan 110.1b (also 
109.12b). 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 




[ ioSS ] 3.B.6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites 

Leif a yixuan pian fit if M U, IS 

15 fols. 

By Patriarch Wan zongshi M th , hao Yuanxu zhenren 7 T (at R A 

1254 (fasc. 997) 

“Explanations on the Mysteries of Thunder Magic.” This is collection of short 
essays on leifa '|f . Only the first piece is by Patriarch Wan. He claims to be a disciple 

of Wang Jun j£f alias Wang Wenqing (1093-1153), the founder of the Five 

Thunder rites ( wuleifa Eft j£) of the Shenxiao W'ft school (3a) who is otherwise 
unknown. Wan relates in his introduction that he first studied the leifa from books but 
failed to understand it. After having been properly initiated, however, he obtained the 
essentials of the art, and the present work is intended to share these with other adepts. 
His essay contains a number of more theoretical considerations on the exorcistic prac- 
tices of Thunder magic. 

A second essay is titled “Leifa yuanhai zhengyanshu (Correct 

Explanations on the Arts [reading for © ] from the Ocean of Thunder Magic). The 

anonymous author wrote a long didactic poem that he had printed in 1248. Probably 
the poem “Yuxiao yin, zeng Shi’an xiansheng (Song of the Jade 

Empyrean, presented to Master Shi’an) is by the same author. From the context, we 
can suppose that the recipient of the poem was surnamed He H ; beside He, the poem 
mentions a Master Kuang f| 5 . Neither person has been indentified. 

The work continues with a short treatise on the “Chuahuo zhenxing 
(True Form of the Violent Fire), the talisman of the God of Thunder. The author ex- 
plains that during the years 1078-1085 this efficacious talisman belonged to Patriarch 
Zeng tmm. The author obtained it in 1133 in Jinling #11 (Nanking). Now, as he 
is advancing in age, he proposes to print it. 

The work ends with a note on the sacrifice to the spirits of the Four Directions on 
the Thunder Altar (“Taiji leitan ji siweishen fa iv tK H ^ R Iff ”)• It contains a 
number of theriomorphic talismans. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 

Taiyi huofu zougao qirang yi fi ^ a 

17 fols. 

217 (fasc. 84) 

“Ritual of Announcement for an Exorcism, from the Fire Court of the Great 
Monad.” This text gives in succinct form the ritual found in 1220 Daofa huiyuan 188-94 
(cf. van der Loon, “A Taoist collection”). According to the introduction to these juan, 
written in 1271 by Huang Yixuan 3 f — •]£, “the thunder of the Fire court of the Great 
Monad ... is a manifestation [huashen {t ] of the true qi of the Northern Dipper.” 
The Great Monad is the “master of the methods” that are linked to the heavenly body 



3.B.6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites [ roSp ] 

known as Yuebo JJ Huang also recounts the story of the first six of the seven an- 
cestral masters of the lineage invoked in the present text ( 1220 Daofa huiyuan 188.3b). 

In addition to an invocation, a triple offering, and the presentation of a memorial, 
the present text contains a litany on the redemptive powers of the lords of the Seven 
Principles of the Northern Dipper. The Fire Court is the residence of the Celestial 
Emperor of the Great Redness. We learn from 1166 Fahaiyizhu 3-5 that this emperor 
is none other than the Great Monad. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang shuo chaotian xielei zhenjing E Jl s£ D! E ft I? 

18 fols. 

17 (fasc. 25) 

“Scripture on Petitioning Heaven for the Propitiation of Thunder.” The thirty-six 
Thunder Gods are in charge of the punishment of evil. The present book tells how 
to avert their wrath, especially for deceased persons. A number of talismans “in seal 
script,” should be put in the Coffin. After closing it, a hole should be made in the wood, 
enabling the talismans to communicate with the powers of the Thunder. 

This scripture, of a popular idiom, is otherwise unknown. A few formal parallels 
loosely link it to the two Thunder books preceding it in the Daozang (is Wushangjiu- 
xiaoyuqingdafanziweixuandu leiting yujing and 16 Jiutianyingyuan kishengpuhua tian- 
zun yushu baojing). It prescribes the incantation of the name of the Jiutian yingyuan 
leisheng puhua tianzun and speaks of the great power of 

Marshal Deng one of the major exorcist gods of the Thunder rites (12a). 

An appendix (15b— 18a) contains four laudatory hymns by different divine worthies, 
each one having apposed his seal as a guarantee for the divine transmission of these 
texts, which appear to be of mediumistic origin; the “canonical titles” given to these 
worthies are spurious. A final paragraph, dictated by Qingdi tianjun calls 

upon the faithful to distribute this scripture in print. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Deng tianjun xuanling bamen baoying neizhi 3PE E PI Wi IfB. a 

14 fols. 

1266 (fasc. 1002) 

“Esoteric Meaning of Retribution through the Eight Gates of Dark Transcendence, 
[Transmitted by] the Heavenly Lord Deng.” The eight gates of dark transcendence 
refer to the disposition of the nine palaces in the Hidden Days (dunjia ^ ) method. 

The Heavenly Lord Deng is a deity of the Five Thunders ritual (1220 Daofa huiyuan 
80, “Yanhuo Idling Deng tianjun dafa %k‘X.W - He was worshipped 
on the Wudang shan (962 Wudang fudi zongzhenji 1.7a). Our text also mentions the 



1 




[ logo ] 3.B.6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites 



3.B.6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites [ iogi ] 



divine marshal Wen yuanshuai um ft &|l (14a, on Wen, see 780 Diqi shangjiang Wen tai- 
bao zhuan). 

The author claims to be inspired, among others, by theories developed by Xu Shou- 
xin (1033-1108) under the name Damen chui gejue IT H fii It IT (ia and 7a). 

The text itself is a collection of magical recipes, short circumambulatory rites, and 
mantic formulas of various origins. It seems to have been conceived primarily for 
therapeutic rituals. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Fahai yizhu M ifi 

46 juan 

Ming (1368-1644) 

1166 (fasc. 825-833) 

“Pearls Retrieved from the Sea of Rites.” This is a loose collection of various meth- 
ods of Five Thunder magic ( wuleifa HWiif)- Many of the rites are close to those given 
in 1220 Daofa huiyucin , albeit in a less complete form (compare, for instance, the rites 
of Marshal Deng JH 5 tc &|l in juan 23 to 26 of the present work with those in juan 80 in 
the Daofa huiyuan). 

This compilation dates to the Ming, as among the deities we find Xuantian shangdi 

T: _h 'rfr , an appellation for Xuanwu only used beginning in Ming times. A 
preface (45.7b) by Zhang Shunlie L? Jf[J , a master of the Tianpeng J:M exorcism 
and healing tradition gives the year 1344. This is the only explicit date in the entire 
work. 

Among the methods that stand out prominently are those related to the Shenxiao 
tradition of the Tushujing (see 16 Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzunyushu 
baojing). Juan 1, 2, and n of the present work contain the Inner Sublimation ( neilian 

^) rites of this tradition. In 11.12b, the ritual calls for the recitation of the Taishang 
huanglao dijun shuo yunlei tiantong zhenjing J ^_ The 
text, as it is given, is a version combining 632 Taishang taiqing tiantong burning miao- 
jing and of 633 Taishang taiqing huanglao dijun yunlei tiantong yinfan xianjing. These 
texts were revealed to Liang Guangying alias Liang Wuzhen f § pL , on 

Maoshan, in 1109 or 1112. 

From juan 12 on, the Fahai yizhu gives all kinds of rituals related to the worship 
of the Dipper stars ( doufa RTi), such as the methods using the divine help of the 
goddess Jiutian xiannu IlRRTC (preface signed by Li Xisheng ^ #!=?). Another 
highly popular deity is Guandi |fjf (here rendered Guan yuanshuai Iff jt BffJ ), who 
has rituals in juan 39 and again in juan 43. 

Juan 14 also contains rites of the Beidou but this time of the Southern school 

(Nanzong R R ) of Bo Yuchan . In juan 14 we find the interesting method of calling 



cranes ( zhaohe S H), whether a single bird as a means of transportation upon achiev- 
ing immortality or a whole flock for enlivening a successfully concluded liturgical 
service. 

Juan 15 has a ritual for the transmission of the wuleifa. The rites of purification and 
Pacing the Mainstay ( bugang tfM) are in general very close to the southern Taiwanese 
practice that still exists today. 

Also close to today’s practice are certain aspects of the exorcist “lifting the earth” 
(qitu |E i ) rites in juan 30 and, equally linked to the Great Year stellar deity (Taisui 
j^M), the rites of Marshal Yin in juan 44. In our text we find (5b— 8b) the 

names and talismans corresponding to the twelve generals who assist Marshal Yin in 
his duties. The names are those of the Twelve Royal Lords ( wangye T:|jj) venerated 
on the occasion of the Royal Offerings ( wangjiao 3 Ej®|) prevalent today in southern 
Taiwan and southern Fujian. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Wushang jiuxiao yuqing dafan ziwei xuandu leiting yujing 

28 fols. 

15 (fasc. 24) 

“Precious Book of the Thunder [Rites] from the Nine Empyrian Jade Purity Great 
Brahma Pole Star Dark Capital.” This undated modern scripture of the Shangqing 
Lingbao liturgy contains a rather systematic presentation of the Shenxiao pan- 
theon and the rituals connected with it. Most of the major deities from this pantheon, 
or assimilated with it, are presented here, as well as some cosmological theories related 
to the Thunder rites. Uppermost are the Nine Sovereigns (Jiuchen JlM) of the Nine 
Stellar Palaces, to whom memorials ( zou H) are addressed. Then come the Nine 
Offices (jiusi fl p]), in charge of receiving the reports ( shen R ; ua-b). 

Bo Yuchan in one of his letters to his disciple Peng Helin IT SI IT, dated 1217, 
mentions the printing of the present scripture by Peng and its distribution in the Jiang- 
xi area (see 130 7 Haiqiong Bo zhenren yulu 4.19b). 

Among the titles of gods mentioned we find the Jiuzhou duxian taishi gaoming 
dashi [Xu Xun] and the Jiutian yingyuan leishen puhua 

tianzun the principal deity of 16 Jiutian yingyuan lei- 

sheng puhua tianzun yushu baojing. These titles are not known before the thirteenth 
century. 

Kristofer Schipper 



! 




[ 1092 ] 3 .B .6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites 

Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun yushu baojing 

II fols. 

16 (fasc. 25) 

“Precious Book of the Jade Pivot, Spoken by the Heavenly Worthy of Universal 
Transformation of the Sound of the Thunder of Responding Origin in the Nine 
Heavens.” This undated work is quoted in the commentary dated 1103 by Zhu Weiyi 
Tfe'llt— of the Leiting aozhi f ( 1220 Daofa huiyuan 76.13b), attributed to Bo 

Yuchan. This suggests that the present work on Five Thunder ritual belongs to the 
early years of the Shenxiao tradition. An edition with a colophon dated 1333 
is preserved in the British Library (see Little, Taoism and the arts of China , 237-39). 
Bo’s involvement in the diffusion of the Shenxiao leiting rites is confirmed in many 
places. His 1307 Haiqiong Bo zhenren yulu 4.19b mentions the printing and diffusion 
by his disciple Peng Helin DU# of a Leiting yujing. This mention may refer to is 
Wushang jiuxiao yuqing dafan ziwei xuandu leiting yujing as well as to the present work, 
which in the colophon ofyy Jiutian yingyuan leish eng puhua tianzun baojing jizhu by 
Thirty-ninth Heavenly Master Zhang Sicheng is also called Leiting yujing and 

dated 1333. 

The Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun is the Taoist form of the Bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra (Puxian H p) ). His presence in the Taoist pantheon is closely linked 
to the present scripture. 

The 16 Tushu baojing is one of the most prominent scriptures in modern liturgy and 
an important treatise on the Shenxiao Thunder rites. The style, the frequent occur- 
rence of abstruse characters, as well as the fact that the commentary 99 Baojing jizhu is 
attributed to Bo, makes the latter a likely candidate for its authorship. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun yushu baojing jizhu 

2 juan 

By Xu Daoling v,hao Xuanyang zi jf |i§ F ; colophon dated 1333 

99 (fasc. 50) 

“Collected Glosses on the Precious Book of the Jade Pivot,” referring to 16 Jiutian 
yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun yushu baojing. The main glosses (zhu gf ) are attrib- 
uted to the patriarch Bo Yuchan whose relationship to the Jade Pivot scripture is well 
known, whereas the first Heavenly Master is credited with explaining the general 
meaning (yi fit ), the Thunder deity Zhang tianjun ’’MfiPi with the interpretation (shi 
?? ), and Lu Dongbin with the hymns ( zan If ). The text quotes no other source. 



3 .B .6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites [ 1093 ] 

According to a colophon by the Thirty-ninth Heavenly Master Zhang Sicheng 
ini /$, , hao Taixuan zi jfjff (d. 1344), the present work was “found” and printed by 
Xuanyang zi, i.e., Xu Daoling. In 1334, the same scholar published a commentary on 
the Beidoujmg 4 1 4 ' ( 7S0 Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansheng zhenjing zhu) 

that in many respects resembles the present. Like these glosses on the Jade Pivot, the 
commentary on the Beidou jing also appears to be based on divine inspiration, in the 
latter case by Zitong dijun a ff? U . 

Kristofer Schipper 

Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun yushu baochan 

II fols. 

195 (fasc. 82) 

“Precious Litany of the Heavenly Worthy of Universal Transformation on the 
Sound of Thunder.” This Heavenly Worthy is the Taoist Samantabhadra, the revealer 
of 16 Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun yushu baojing (see the present text, 5a), of 
which this ritual is a cognate. It does not follow the usual litany style of reciting long 
lists of Tianzun, but is more in the style of a homage (liwen Pages 8a-9b list the 

deities of the Shenxiao pantheon, including the Jiuchen flU . 

Kristofer Schipper 

Leiting yushu youzui fachan M ft tii IP (£ tH 

9 fols. 

196 (fasc. 82) 

“Ritual Litany for the Forgiving of Sins from the Jade Pillar of Thunder.” The 196 
Touzui fachan short ritual, cognate to 16 Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun yushu 
baojing. The Jiutian yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun H itfzW is 

invoked as the Lord of the Thirty-six Heavens. 

A hymn in seven-character verses on 4a-b has a distictly popular flavor. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang xuansi miezui zifu xiaozai fachan U ^ M fP ^ Iff ^ (i fil 

10 fols. 

536 (fasc. 29s) 

“Litany of the Most High for Blotting out Sins in the Dark Tribunal and Averting 
Disaster in the Purple Office.” Recited by a priest on behalf of a lay believer, this ritual 
enables one to avoid any star-fated catastrophe and to appear innocent in the courts 
of the underworld. 



1 




[ W94 ] 3.B.6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites 



3.B.7 The Qingwei School [ 109s ] 



The high rank in the celestial hierarchy accorded Leisheng puhua tianzun 
AEt? marks this text as modern. 



- a 



John Lagerwey 



Gaoshang shenxiao yuqing zhenwang zishu dafa 

12 juan 

Ming dynasty (1368-1644)? 

1219 (fasc. 881-883) 

“Great Magic from the Purple Book of the True King of the Highest Divine Em- 
pyrean Jade Purity.” This is a complete manual of exorcism in the tradition of the Five 
Thunder magic. By a number of elements, notably diagrams (juan 1) and initiation 
tides (5.6a), it is indeed linked to other Shenxiao manuals, but without the “salvation 
by refining” ( liandu component. The undated and unsigned preface explains 

that the True King, who is the patron deity of this form of exorcism, is the eldest of 
eight sons of the Yuanshi tianwang TT^nEcE and his spouse, the Jiutian shangxuan 
yuqing shenmu AEEEEilf W EL The True King is also known as Nanji changsh- 
en dadi ^ M A A ■ By his own volition, he descended to Earth to save mankind. 
This account is slighty altered in the book itself, as on page 1.3b, the Yuanshi tianwang 
declares: “I have ordered the Taihuang wanfii zhenjun to open the 

book cases of the Purple Empyrean and give them to 
the eldest son of the Jade Emperor [Yudi] so that the 
teachings of Heaven be promulgated and mankind 
may be saved and return to the correct Tao.” In the 
genealogical chart given on 1.14b, it is also shown 
that Yuhuang descends from Yuanshi tianwang, and 
that the Shenxiao yuqing wang is the oldest of the 
eight sons of Yuhuang. On page 1.15b, the deity is 
again identified as the son of the YuansJii tianwang. 
Probably, Yuhuang is considered here as the hypos- 
tasis of the Yuanshi tianwang. 

At the beginning of juan 1, it is specified that 
the True King was ordered by Yuhuang shangdi 
3 £ M-t'Sr to become the ruler of all men (that is, 
the emperor of China; 1.1a). This is spelled out in 
greater detail on page 3a, where the revelation of the 
Shenxiao fa is linked to the crucial year jiachen Ep Jg 
of the Lord of the Tao’s (Daojun jjf E ) ascendancy. 
As in other texts in this part, these are references to 
the reign of Song Huizong (1100-1125) as a Taoist 




figure 54. Female deity holding 
the register ( 1219 11.35a). Ming 
reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the 
Bibliotheque nationale de France. 
(Chinois 9546/1202) 



redeemer. Similar prophecies are found in the preface of 147 Lingbao wuliang duren 
shangpin miaojing futu attributed to Song Huizong concerning the year renchen 3 r M • 
These years could then correspond to the years 1124 and 1112 respectively. 

In fact, however, nothing in the present work allows us to consider it as a product 
of the reign of Huizong and the liturgy of Lin Lingsu. The latter part of the work 
contains the documents for the transmission of the present ritual tradition, and there 
the True King is already the patron saint ( zushi ) of the order (12.9b). A passage 

beginning on 5.6a gives the full range of ordination titles and their correspondence 
with the ordinary degrees of the Taoist clergy. These grades appear to be those of the 
modern Zhengyi order, such as Zhengyi mengwei IE — MM, Sanwu dugong HE 
IrISjjfj, Shangqing dadong _h? 1 f EtPH, (s.2a-b) and this is confirmed for the offices 
( zhi M. ) the masters receive (see 5.6b). The present work was therefore compiled at a 
time the Shenxiao revelation was already fully institutionalized and coupled with the 
liturgical organization of the Zhengyi order. 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 



3.B.7 The Qingwei School 

Among the modern lineages of Thunder rites for exorcism and salvation, the 
Qingwei MM school has a special importance. As the latest of the different ritual 
currents, it appears as a successor to most others, extending its patriarchy well into 
the Ming dynasty (1368-1644). It endeavors to encompass the different traditions, 
such as Zhengyi IE—, Lingbao iljf, and Daode iilii, and reveres the Shangqing 
±/r female patriarch Wei Huacun as one of its founders. The school was officially 
recognized and adopted by the Zhengyi order. Its patriarchs are mentioned among 
those of the various schools in the prayers of 503 Tula shengshen zidu zhuanjing yi , a 
ritual performed at the Ming court. In the ordination tables of the Qing (1644-1911) 
period of the Baiyun guan S ® temple in Peking, the Qingwei school ranks second 

in importance to the Quanzhen E M order (see Oyanagi Shigeta, Hakuunkan shi, 
103-8). Indeed, during the Qing, the daoshi of die Zhengyi order were often defined, 
in terms of their liturgical capacity, as “Lingbao qingwei Mil? 'MM” practitioners. 

The Qingwei school claims its descent from the legendary female ancestor Zu Shu 
ffitf, who is said to have lived during the Five Dynasties (907-960) period in the 
southern region of Guangxi. She had many women disciples. Huang Shunshen, 
a local official in Guangxi during the thirteenth century, is named in the extensive 
genealogies of the Qingwei school as one of the founders. The multiple references 




[ 1096 ] 3.B.7 The Qingwei School 



of the scholar Zheng Sixiao fp® ^ (1241-1318) to Qingwei rites in South China 
suggest their popularity at that time (see his S48 Taijijilian neifa , preface and passim). 
Other daoshi whose relationship with the Qingwei school is indicated by independent 
sources include Ye Xizhen ^#lH, also known as Ye Yunlai who was active 

in the late thirteenth century (see 962 Wudang fudi zongzhenji 3.27b), and his disciple 
Zhang Shouqing. The patriarch Zhao Yizhen (d. 1382) also contributed to 
the dissemination of the Qingwei methods. After their deaths, these patriarchs were 
enshrined as members of the pantheon of the Qingwei school, for this movement 
practiced the deification of human beings even more extensively than had the preced- 
ing Tianxin zhengfa A'L'IEji; and the Shenxiao fa Wr i'£ • 

The Qingwei school developed a distinctive style of talismanic writing, which is 
found in all their scriptures and rituals (see, for instance, the rendition of the text of 1 
Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing in 80 Yunzhuan duren miaojing). Considering 
itself a successor to the Shenxiao school, the movement was mainly concerned with 
Thunder methods (leifa ff : (f ) for the purpose of saving the souls of the dead. How- 
ever, the extensive manual of Qingwei rites included at the beginning of 1220 Daofa 
huiyuan (juan 1-55) also contains rites for obtaining offspring (juan 42) and protection 
against epidemics, war, locusts, tigers, and other calamities. The last chapter of the 
manual (juan 55) is devoted to the treatment of mental illness. 

The relationship between the Qingwei school and the Yuhuang benxing jijing 3 l 
(10-11 Gaoshang yuhuang benxing and 14-40 Huangjing jizhu) deserves at- 
tention. Although it is the fundamental scripture ( benwen A A) of the daoshi of the 
Lingbao qingwei school, the texts of the Yuhuang jing do not explicitly mention this 
relationship. Yet other closely related scriptures, such as 194 Gaoshang yuhuang man- 
yuan baozhan , clearly indicate that they belong to the Qingwei school by invoking its 
patriarchs and saints (see, e.g., i.ib-2a and 2.1b). The Yuhuang jing did not appear 
before the late Southern Song (1127-1279) period. It seems safe to assume that it was 
a scripture of the Qingwei school. 

Gaoshang yuhuang benxing jijing 

3 juan 

10 (fasc. 23) 

“Combined Scriptures of the Founding Acts of the Jade Emperor on High.” This 
text comprises three scrolls (Juan ) and five chapters (pin). Since the late middle ages, 
Yuhuang 31 1|| has been an epithet given to the chief deity of the pantheon. In this 
most sacred scripture of modern Taoism, he is pictured as the leader of the host of gods 
assembling before the throne of the Heavenly Worthy of the Primordial Beginning in 
the Qingwei jjf ® heaven. There he multiplies his body in order to speak to all parts 
of the universe the Pure Doctrine of Salvation. Then he becomes one again and tells 



3.B.7 The Qingwei School [ 109 7 ] 



the story of his birth as an avatar of the Most High Daojun and his subsequent cultiva- 
tion of sainthood during 3,200 kalpas, before attaining the status of Golden Immortal 
with the title ofTathagata (rulai ), King of Pure and Spontaneous Awakening, in 

order to teach all bodhisattva the true doctrine of Mahayana. 

The scriptures making up 10 Yuhuang benxing jijing are not mentioned before the 
thirteenth century. The appendix of the Junzhai dushu zhi of 1249 (“Fuzhi [iff A,” 1161) 
gives a reference to an edition printed in 1240 by the Chengtian lingying guan TpE A H! 
UB IS in Hangzhou, which was based on a version from Sichuan (Shu ben §§;$), with 
a preface by Cheng Gongxu fl jj (jinshi 1211; VDL 99). The Chengtian lingying 
guan is mentioned in Xianchun Lin’an zhi 75.8a. It was dedicated to the cult of Zitong 
dijun f? and received its present name in 1236. 

Quotations from the 10 Yuhuang benxing jijing can be found in a number of Yuan 
(1279-1368) works, such as 103 Yuqing wuji zongzhen zhenwen Wenchang dadongxian- 
jing zhu 5.17a, 25b. The second pin contains the revelation, by Yuanshi tianzun, of the 
True Writs in Vermilion Writing on Jade Tablets (Lingbao chishuyupian zhenwen M S? 
TfcWtYLWiiMrjC) from 22 Yuanshi wulao chishu yupian zhenwen tianshu jing. 

The extent to which the present work may be a reconstitution based on the lost 
early Lingbao scripture Lingbao zhenwen duren benxing miaojing 
%}/M. (see Lagerwey, Wu-shang pi-yao, 265) is difficult to determine. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Gaoshang yuhuang benxing jijing _L 3 E iH df. ff M IS 

3 juan, 6 fols. + 3 fois.; appendix (Songjing ganying it H (8 US), 4 fols. 

Attributed to Zhang Liang (Hi (d. 187 b.c.) 

11 (fasc. 23-24) 

“Combined Scriptures of the Founding Acts by the Jade Emperor on High.” This 
undated commentary, spuriously attributed to Zhang Liang in his function as supreme 
minister of the Heavenly Pivot (Tianshu shangxiang AfH_hf§), is placed directly 
after the “fundamental scriptures” (benwen A A) text of the corresponding scripture 
of the same title in the Ming canon, 10 Yuhuang benxing jijing . It is difficult to say 
whether this placement is the result of an oversight by the compilers or whether this 
commentary was equally considered to be a benwen. The text yields no clues as to the 
date of its compilation. The commentary is preceded and followed by a number of 
equally spurious documents pertaining to the collation and transmission of the text 
by two unknown saints named Lin Shaohua and Cang Rujia MfkM- 

The appendix contains seven anecdotes illustrating the miraculous powers of the 
text, all dating from the Sui (581-618) and Tang (618-907) periods. The sources of 
these anecdotes are unknown. 

Kristofer Schipper 




[ 1098 ] 3.B.7 The Qingwei School 



3.B.7 The Qingwei School [ 1099 ] 



Gaoshang yuhuang benxing jingsui 

6 fols. + 3 fols. appendix, “Chuanjing yuanliu 

Transmitted by Liu Chuyuan §£lj iMM (fl. 1344) 

12 (fasc. 24) 

“Essentials of the Combined Scriptures of the Founding Acts of the Jade Emperor 
on High.” This is an abbreviated version of 10 Gaoshang yuhuang benxing jijing. Ac- 
cording to the appended account, this abstract was passed on to Liu Chuyuan by 
an immortal in the year 1344. Liu was a Qingwei MW master of the twenty-fourth 
generation after the founding goddess Qingzhen Zixu yuanjun (Wei 

Huacun). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Gaoshang yuhuang xinyin jing 1® . L I Jl 'll' ER $5 

1 fol. 

13 (fasc. 24) 

“Scripture of the Seal of the Heart of the Jade Emperor.” This text is a didactic poem 
in four-word verses, without any indication as to authorship or date. The mention of 
the practice of the Silent Audience before the Emperor-on-High {nwchao shangdi 
±^) refers to an important meditative and liturgical practice of the Southern Song 
(1127-1279) period. 

The present text is included in the liturgy of $29 Lingbao wujing tigang , which is also 
probably a Southern Song work. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang lingbao chaotian xiezui dachan 

10 juan 

189 (fasc. 79-80) 

“Great Litany of Atonement, for the Audience in Heaven of the Lingbao Liturgy.” 
This longest of all Taoist litanies, listing no less than 1,200 Heavenly Worthies tianzun 
(^ # ), is of a late date. Among the great Heavenly Worthies invoked at the beginning 
of each litany, we find, for instance, the Zhenming dasheng jiutian yingyuan leisheng 
puhua tianzun, the Taoist Samantabhadra, introduced by 16 Jiutian yingyuan leisheng 
puhua tianzun yushu baojing. Its recitation is mentioned in 467 Da Ming xuanjiao 
licheng zhaijiao yi 10b (dated 1374). 

Kristofer Schipper 



Yuhuang youzui xifu baochan 

24 fols. 

By Xin Hanchen E; fourteenth century (?) 

193 (fasc. 81) 

“Precious Litany of Repentance That Moves the Jade Emperor to Grant Absolu- 
tion from Guilt and the Allotment of Good Fortune.” This writing is attributed to 
Xin Hanchen, who was “commander-in-chief of the fierce messengers ofThunder and 
Lightening” ( Leiting mengli dudu If ; see also 1307 Haiqiong Bo zhenren 

yulu 2.14a and 1220 Daofa huiyuan 61.2b). The work opens with a reference to 10 Gao- 
shang yuhuang benxing jijing and gives the great invocation of Yuhuang ( baohao jjjf ) 

from that scripture (5a). 

Eulogies of the might and glory of the gods introduce this work, featuring the guilt 
of man and his desire to do penance. Repentance can be realized by reciting this litany. 
At the end of each phrase, the honorary title of a deity was to be added. These prayers 
had to be spoken together with a Taoist priest. Eight paragraphs follow this part of 
the work. They present texts were used by Taoist priests as petitions to specific deities. 
The priest introduces the lay person on whose behalf he is acting to these deities. He 
also explains the distress of his client. Litanies appropriate to each case are provided. 
The first and second part (ia-jb) of this work, however, do not feature such litanies. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Gaoshang yuhuang manyuan baochan jtjJidiilliiiSSiifflit 

10 juan 

Fourteenth century 

194 (fasc. 81-82) 

“Precious Litany That Moves the Jade Emperor on High to Fulfill Wishes.” This 
work contains ten litanies conveying requests or prayers addressed to the Jade Em- 
peror. The text also introduces the names of the ancestors of the Qingwei MW school 
and representatives of the other Taoist groups. They are all members of the pantheon 
to which the envisaged religious performance is to be directed. This internal evidence 
points to the fourteenth century as the most likely period for the composition of the 
text. 

A presentation of the relevant pantheon can be found at the very beginning of the 
text. It is headed by the deity Yuanshi tianzun jiitnJztJ, who is labeled “Leader of 
the Doctrine, who preaches the scriptures.” There are some practical instructions for 
the performance of the recitations. Participants kneel and concentrate their minds. The 
priest sends a petition to the deities including the names of all participants present. 
Then the litanies are recited, addressing Yuhuang da tianzun xuan qionggao shangdi 

The various wishes and vows are stated in the tides of the 




[ iioo ] 3. B. 7 The Qingwei School 

ten chapters of this work, for example, “Chuzui (The Elimination of Guilt; juan 

4). The pious intentions formulated in this text and the very name of the main deity 
seem to connect this text with 193 Yuhuang youzui xifu baochan. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Qingwei xianpu 1ft® fill iu 
17 fols. 

Transmitted by Huang Shunshen hno Leiyuan ft $3 (fl. 1224-1287); 

preface by Chen Cai dated 1293 
171 (fasc. 75) 

Chronology of the Immortals of the Qingwei Heaven.” This work was transmitted 
by the founder of the Qingwei j# ® school, Huang Shunshen (15b). His follower 
Chen Cai wrote the preface, which states that the tradition featured in the chronology 
had always been in existence under various names: Shangqing, Lingbao, Daode, and 
Zhengyi. These currents had been united during the Tang (618-907) and Song (960- 
i 2 79) periods by Zhaoning zu yuanjun Bp (M ffl 7C Wt and Hunyin zhenren N angong jj| 
18 31 respectively. The contacts between Nan Bidao j^jJUif (Nangong) and 

Huang Shunshen resulted in the continuation of the tradition. Huang Shun- 
shen lived in Fujian, whence he disseminated the teachings of Qingwei. Thanks to 
the Qingwei Taoists’ knowledge, they were able to enlist the help of the heavenly 
powers to produce rain or thunder. They were also able to call forth spirits and gods 
to heal the sick and come to the assistance of others generally (preface, 15a). The name 
Qingwei stands for the highest heaven, see 1128 Daomen jingfa xiang cheng cixu 3.1a. 

This text has six paragraphs, beginning with the Qingwei lineage, followed by 
the other names of the tradition mentioned above. The names of deities are cited, as 
well as their heavenly residences and their human avatars. The text also points to the 
scriptures or credentials that these deities or saints have passed to their successors as 
tokens of legitimation. Huang Shunshen is the last name in the sixth paragraph 
(nb-ijb), which describes the unification of all the traditions, again called “Qing- 
wei.” 

The chronology of the present work can be compared with 223 Qingwei yuanjiang 
dafa 25.8b-i2b, in which the tides of the deities, however, show many variants (cf. also 
224 Qingwei zhaifa i.ia-i3b). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Reiter, Grundelemente , 45-50. 



Florian C. Reiter 



3 .B .7 The Qingwei School [ 1101 ] 



Qingwei yuanjiang dafa iff 

25 juan 

Fourteenth century 

223 (fasc. 106-110) 

“Great Rituals of the Manifestation of the Original Forces of the Qingwei Heaven.” 
The writings comprised by the present text were collected after the time of Huang 
Shunshen (thirteenth century; 25.8b-i2b; see 171 Qingwei xianpu). 

This work includes scriptures, petitions, and fti, which are partly written in magical 
characters. It includes as well instructions on how to read them. They were designed 
for use in specific rituals. There are numerous explanations concerning the handling 
of such fu as well as the (visionary) appearances of the deities involved. This work also 
contains some theoretical essays, such as “On the Origin of Taoism” (Daoyuan jit JK ; 
i.8b-9b) and “The Inner Basis for Taoist Rituals” (Daofa shuniu {§ 25.3b-8b; 

cf. also 1220 Daofa huiyuan i.2b-8a). The present work is the most comprehensive title 
in the Taoist canon dealing with the ritual methods of the Qingwei Taoists. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Sandong shenfu ji j|»J Jfjl Hi] 

23 fols. 

79 (fasc. 36) 

“Notes on the Divine Talisman of the Three Caverns.” This is a late compilation 
made from two different sources. 

The first part (pages ia to 14a), taken without any changes from YJQQ 7, is a small 
treatise on divine writings quoting many sources from the Six Dynasties (220-589) 
and Tang (618-907) periods. It presumably was part of a larger work known as the 
Daomen dalun iM PI Ira ■ 

The second part, beginning on 14a, contains instructions for writing fu-talismans of 
the modern Qingwei jjf ® school, followed by the reproduction of five cosmic writs 
called Taishang fuluo wupian of that same school. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Yunzhuan duren miaojing SI U ® A if If 

35 fols. 

80 (fasc. 36) 

“Marvelous Book of Salvation in Seal Script.” The transcription of the Duren jing 
using “cloud seal” characters was very popular during the Southern Song (1127-1279). 
Jin Yunzhong criticizes it thus: “In this fashion, people make a seal out of eight 
characters in the text. Thus, there is extant a ‘celestial seal character 5 [tianzbuan jfWi] 
Duren jing, and it would be possible to transcribe the entire text into innumerable 



[ / 102 ] 3 .B .7 The Qingwei School 



1 



3 .B. 7 The Qingwei School [ 1103 ] 



seals” (1223 Shangqing lingbao dafa 10.7b). Indeed, the Tiantai Lingbao dafa 

school did precisely that (see 219 Lingbao wuliang duren shangjing dafa 5—7). 

One of the chief functions of the seal in Taoism is to summon spiritual beings. In 
563 Taishang lingbao jingming feixian duren jingfa 1.6a, for example, this type of writ in 

celestial seal characters is said to be a kind of “true writ for summoning [the spirits] 
of the Ten Directions. The characters that most closely resemble those in the present 
text are found in 223 Qingwei yuanjiang dafa , (Grand Method of the Descent from the 
Primordium of the Supreme Heaven), and the latter title may reveal something of the 
origin of this kind of text: the term “descent” (jiang prf) is often used with “brush” 
(bi ' 0 - ) to refer to mediumnistic writing. 

John Lagerwey 

Qingwei xuanshu zougao yi iff W £ fg # g f|§ 

13 fols. 

School of Ye Yunlai H U M ; Yuan (1279-1368) 

218 (fasc. 84) 

“Qingwei Ritual for Memorializing to the Mysterious Pillar [i.e., the Heavenly 
Chancellery].” This is a hybrid liturgy composed by the disciples of Ye Yunlai (fl. late 
thirteenth century), one of the successors to Huang Shunshen (fl. 1224-1286; see 
1311 Xianquan ji 1.19a) and a senior member of the branch to which the well-known 
Yuan Taoist Zhang Shouqing (fl. 1315— 1332) belonged (see 222 Qingwei shenlie bifa 
1.3b). 

In the present work, the lineage of patriarchs ends with Ye Yunlai (ib and 2b). This 
ordering, in the context of the Qingwei M W school, means that this ritual was com- 
posed by Ye’s direct disciples. 

The ritual opens with a long invocation of the masters (ia-3b), followed by the 
invitation to the emissaries to be charged with the transmission of the memorial. After 
these preliminary rites follows the presentation, a mixture of a daochang ifjt§ ritual 
and a lamp rite for the cult of the Dipper stars. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Qingwei shenlie bifa i# W £11 £ r [ ff 

2 juan 

Fourteenth century 

222 (fasc. 105) 

Secret Methods of the Divine Fire of the Qingwei Heaven.” This text is a collection 
of Qingwei tS W methods. The words “Divine Fire” also form part of the titles of the 
two Heavenly Marshals Gou Liuji cf and Bi Zongyuan , who together 

with the Master of the Teachings, Zihuang taiyi tianjun constitute 



the highest triad of the Thunder Gods (i.3b-4a). The introductory passages explain 
the revelation of the “Thunder methods of the Qingwei heaven” which are identified 
with the Shenxiao methods. The subsequent line of transmission begins with 
Wei Huacun, but names like Zhang Shouqing from Mount Wudang extend 
the lineage well beyond the time of Huang Shunshen (see 171 Qingwei xianpu ; cf. 
96iXuantian shangdi qisheng lingyi lu nb-i2b). 

The text contains fix, magical writings, and petitions that can be used to address 
the respective deities and the many assisting generals and messengers. They all may 
help to expel demons or to rescue people from distress. The text also gives practical 
instructions about the ways of writing out these fu and how to present them. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Qingwei zhaifa MW’M ?£ 

2 juan 

Fourteenth century 

224 (fasc. in) 

“Qingwei Liturgies of Purification.” This title describes practical procedures for 
presenting petitions to the Qingwei MW pantheon. It is a collection of texts and 
instructions. 

The “Line of Transmission” introduces these presentations. It resembles 171 Qing- 
wei xianpu, but does not contain a section on the Shangqing tradition. The names of 
the saints are not entirely the same as those in 171 Qingwei xianpu, and they occupy 
different sections. This transmission is followed by the “Exposition Concerning the 
Elimination of Doubts with Regard to the Performance of Taoist Rituals,” in which 
the nature of Taoist ways is compared with the Neo-Confucian ideal of the “investi- 
gation of things.” This concept is also mentioned in 222 Qingwei shenlie bifa 1.2a and 
suggests a common background of Neo-Confucian inspiration and diction. After this 
exposition, the text presents “The Great Rituals of Purification and Celebration of 
the Lingbao Tradition.” Explanations are offered concerning the divine hierarchies, 
the divinities, and their spheres of dominion. Finally, some explanations deal with the 
“nine feasts of purification” and their divine patrons. The remaining parts of this work 
contain mostly literary formulas, “registers” “petitions” “letters” and fu. The texts 
describe the purposes for which they may be used (e.g., the salvation of the souls of 
the ancestors, help for the country). There are also some instructions about the actual 
composition and the presentation of such religious formulas, which include the names 
of the divine addressees and the transmitting messengers. 

Florian C. Reiter 



[ H 04 ] 3.B.7 The Qingwei School 



3.B.7 The Qingwei School [ nos ] 



Qingwei danjue if ft M 
io fols. 

278 (fasc. 134) 

“Instructions for the Practice of Inner 
Alchemy of the Qingwei School.” Huang 
Shunshen, hoc Leiyuan ff$j| (fl. 1224- 
1287), the founder of the Qingwei if ' 0 . 
school, is quoted on page 3 b of this work. 
The tide constitutes a short guide to medi- 
tative practice of a very general and simple 
nature, in particular as a preparation for 
officiants before ascending the altar in litur- 
gical services ( lintcm Em if). The text clearly 
explains the main points in the body, and a 
diagram of the Inner Structure is given on 
page 8b (fig. 55). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taisbang lingbao hongfu miezui xiangming jing ^C_hS 

40 fols. 

377 (fasc. 182) 

“Scripture of the Metaphoric Names for Eliminating Guilt and Increasing Good 
Fortune.” Seeing that his son Haikong $53?, heir to the throne of the kingdom of An- 
ren $ JQ H , is determined to become a monk, the king summons to court the zhenren 
Peerless. Peerless transmits the Lingbao zhenwen MW R and the Sanyuan pinjie — 

JC to iS to Haikong “in accordance with the ritual code.” Thus prepared, Haikong sets 
off to study on the Mount of the Man-Bird. After twelve years of pure fasting, the Five 
Old Imperial Lords transform him into a zhenren by transmitting a book to him. 

Returning to the throne, Haikong prepares and distributes “a mountain of food” 
on the Day of the Median Principle. The incense mounts to the Nine Heavens, where 
Yuanshi tianzun jtltnfiM-, seeing that Haikong is ready to be “transformed” (huadu 
it K ), sends a celestial cortege to bring him to Heaven. At the same time, the celestial 
assembly gathers around the Tianzun, who radiates a light of five colors. The zhenren 
of Immortal Powers sees that the people of “the world below 3 ’ are all in trouble with 
the Three Officials because of their sinfulness, and he asks the Tianzun what they 
should do to obtain pardon. 

The present text is the response of Yuanshi tianzun to this query. It consists in a 
triple sequence of homage to the Three Treasures, followed each time by a confession 
of sins and an expression of wishes. The homages take the form of the recitation of 



“metaphoric names.” In the first sequence, for example, homage is paid to 120 Tian- 
zun, to “the venerable scripture in twelve sections” and to twenty-two Taoists of leg- 
end, such as Wei Boyang and Li Babai ^ AH • Recitation of these names procures 
“immense good fortune and the elimination of guilt.” 

In the first sequence, homage is paid to a series of books whose tides are the same 
as those in the table of contents of 8 Taisbang sanshiliu bu zunjing-, in the second se- 
quence, several of these tides recur, but menuon is also made of 1138 Wushang biyao 
and 10 Gaosbang yuhuang benxing jijing . The text cannot, therefore, be earlier than the 
Song (960-1279) period. 

John Lagerwey 

Zihuang liandu xuanke ^ M % 14 

30 fols. 

1451 (fasc. 1064) 

“Sublimation Ritual of the Purple Sovereign.” This text provides a ritual of subli- 
mation (first by fire, then by water) and passage to the other world (reconstitution 
and dressing of the deceased person’s body, transmission of the commandments). The 
Purple Sovereign is identified with “the unique qi of Heaven in die falu fM and 
with the Emperor of the North by his tide, which includes the more usual name of 
Xuantian shangdi AAT.ffL The Qingwei school is the first mentioned in an 
enumeration (3a) of various lineages, and so it seems likely that the text belongs to that 
school. We may note as well that some of these lineages, such as that of “the method 
of Fengdu,” are known only from texts in 1220 Daofa huiyuan. 

Three things distinguish this ritual from other liandu fUK rituals: the massive use 
of generals and marshals, the ascension of the ritual master onto a throne to perform 
the ritual in a seated position, and the transformation of the reconstituted body into 
a cosmic one. 

John Lagerwey 

Daofa huiyuan il # 7t 

268 juan 

Ming (1368-1644) 

1220 (fasc. 884-941) 

“Taoist Methods, United in Principle.” This tide constitutes a vast, undated, and 
unsigned, collection of rites (fa /£) related to many forms of modern practices and 
cults. The table of contents of this congshu HU lists a great number of such /a, 
but in fact many belong to larger entities constituting manuals in their own right, 
predominandy of “salvation through sublimation” (liandu K ) rituals combined 

with the methods of Thunder magic (leifa ff'/i). A number of the prefaces and 







figure 55 . The Inner 
Structure, showing the 
Cinnabar Field and the 
spinal column, with the 
caption “Downstream 
makes a human being, 
upstream an immortal 
is born” ( 278 8b) 




[ iio6 ] 3 .B .7 The Qingwei School 



1 



3 . B . 7 The Qingwei School [ 1107 ] 



colophons of these manuals have been preserved, thus giving us some indication 
as to their dates and the origins. These elements do not, however, readily resolve 
the problem of the compiler’s identity and the date of the work’s compilation. As 
we have not found any editions of the Daofa huiyucm outside the Daozang, it may 
be that the collection was especially compiled for the Ming canon, possibly by the 
Daozang editors themselves. This hypothesis may be reinforced by the fact that the 
Daofa huiyuan begins with a long section (juan 1-55) devoted to the rites of the Qing- 
wei school that contains a certain number of texts edited by Zhao Yizhen 
(d. 1382), together with his prefaces and colophons (see, e.g., 5.39a, 7.8b, 8.3b, 14.3b, 
14.15a, and 17.17b). However, in other places, and especially in the latter parts in that 
section (from juan 19 onward), Zhao’s name and title are given in the ritual invoca- 
tions addressed to deified patriarchs summoned to descend to the altar and receive 
homage and offerings (see 19.3b, 20.4b, 21.2b, 23.6b, 25.2b-3a, 26.9a, 32.4b, 33.2a, 
34.4a, 46.2a, and 49.18b). These invocations imply that at the time this manual was 
compiled and included in the Daofa huiyuan, Zhao Yizhen had been dead long 
enough to be deified by his successors. In other words, it had to have been completed 
well after 1382 by a direct or indirect disciple of Zhao (cf. Schipper, “Master Chao I- 
chen”). The name that comes most readily to mind is that of Shao Yizheng q[f 
(fl.1427-1454), the successor to Zhao’s disciple Liu Yuanran (1351-1432). Liu and 
Shao were both patriarchs of the Qingwei school. Shao became the final compiler 
of the Ming Daozang (see the general introduction). All this points to a date some- 
where during the first half of the fifteenth century for the compilation of the Daofa 
huiyuan. 

The real founder of the Qingwei school was Huang Shunshen, who was born 
in 1224 in Fujian and was received at the court of Kublai in 1286. Most of Huang’s 
followers, and many other masters of Thunder magic as well, also came from Fujian, 
especially from the northern parts of the province, or else from the adjoining districts 
of southeastern Zhejiang. This region seems therefore to have played a major role in 
the origin and diffusion of the Five Thunder rites ( wuleifa Eft /£). 

It would be beyond the scope of this summary to give a detailed account of the 
contents of the collection. We shall present here only its major components. 

The Qingwei rituals that occupy the first fifty-five juan open with a description of 
the well-known background of this school: the lineage of patriarchs, beginning with 
the two female saints Wei Huacun and Zu Shu ftii’jf, as well as the mysterious 
writings they received and from which the Qingwei fut derived. (See fig. 56.) Central 
to the Qingwei ritual is the liandu practice by which the souls of the deceased are saved 
through the meditation (i.e.. Inner Alchemy) of the officiant. Some minor rituals con- 
cern the pacification of domestic deities, those of the hearth, the doors, the well, the 




figure 56. Primordial Revelation and the Secret Sounds of the Qingwei (1220 4-ia-b). Ming 
reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1203) 



privy, etc. (antu % ± ; juan 7), the protection of candidates to the official examinations 
( shijin f±M), protection against locusts (quhuang Hit). Later in the Daofa huiyuan 
(juan 249 and 250), we find the complete set of initiation and ordination rules for the 
Qingwei school. 

The next part of the collection (juan 56-71) is more heterogeneous. Here a great 
number of different rituals have as sole common denominator a more or less explicit 
relation to the Five Thunder rites of the Shenxiao school (see part 3.B.1). The 
Thunder ritual reputedly founded by Wang Jun alias Wang Wenqing 

(1093— 1153 3 see 67.25a), who obtained it from a divine immortal, the fire master 
(huoshi X ) Wang Zihua fcEEIji (supposedly of the Tang dynasty, 618-907). It was 
later transmitted to many masters, some of whom put their signatures to the prac- 
tices assembled here. First we find Bo Yuchan (fl. 1194-1229), who contributed a 
commentary to theXuanzhuge Iffc in juan 70. Then there are Zhang Shanyuan i§ 
=j§ m (A- 1280-1294) and Sa Shoujian glypH (A- early twelfth century). Both authors 
offer explanations on the nature of thunder in juan 67. Finally, we find the names of 
Pan Songnian Yang Gengchang M#, and Mo Yueding if (1226- 

1293). Some of the contributions are of a doctrinal nature, for instance the Qidao 
baduan jin fr SI by Wang Wenqing, in which the patriarch explains a method 

of prayer combined with the practice of Inner Alchemy. There is also a commentary 
by a certain Yufeng WH, mentioned by the Heavenly Master Zhang Yuchu in his 1311 



f 110S ] 3 .B .7 The Qingwei School 



Xianquanji 2.3ib-33b. Another interesting treatise is the above-mentioned Xuanzhu 
3 e -> 31x0 by Wang Wenqing (juan 70). Finally there is the “Powang zhang a 

rhymed treatise by the Thirtieth Heavenly Master Zhang Jixian (1092-1126). 

This text is also found in the Daozang as 979 Mingzhen powang zhangsong HI) ijS |i| 

The following three juan (73-75), tided “Tianshu leizhuan 2 # 11 1 ?,” belong to 
the Maoshan tradition of leifa if j£ . They claim to hail from Ge Xuan and the Tang 
(sic) Heavenly Master Zheng Siyuan (i.e., Zheng Yin). Many other “histori- 

cal” patriarchs are also mentioned as revealers of these texts. 

From juan 76 through 108, the rituals again belong to the Shenxiao school of Wang 
Wenqing and others. The “Leiting miaoqi of juan 77 is also found in i2 S 3 

Daofa xinchuan. Among these many texts, a separate group is formed by juan 83-87, 
under the title of Xiantian leijing yinshu X ft H ISt 1 } .” This work is attributed to 
Wang, and contains important indications concerning the tradition of the wulei fa (see 
84.ia-5b). The final five juan (104-108) of this part of the congshu stand also out as a 
single book called “Gaoshang jingxiao sanwu hunhe durian dalei langshu j §5 _h H fr H 
E iH n IIP X A Ilf ill 31 , abbreviated as “Dutian dalei fa.” It was purportedly written 
by Bo Yuchan, who had received it from his master Chen Nan (fl. 1111-1118). 
In a postface dated 1212, Bo provides a biography of Chen and describes how the lat- 
ter received this Thunder magic (io8.i 5 b-i6b). At the end of Bo’s postface, there is an 
undated colophon by the great Yuan scholar Yu Ji JlH (1272-1348). Yu Ji explains that 
this Jingxiao leishu was in fact in the possession of a daoshi called Wu ^,hao Puyun 
if , who obtained it in the north of China but was unable to understand it. Upon 
returning to Hangzhou, the daoshi meditated and prayed, until Bo Yuchan himself 
descended into the meditation room and gave him the necessary explanations. Yu Ji 
writes about Wu as a friend and contemporary. This story is at variance with a text by 
Bo Yuchan himself, the Inscription for the Pavilion of the Meeting of Immortals of 
the Yulong Gong (“Yulong gong huixian ge ji 2 It g # f[ij ^ j£”) in Yulong ji 2 H H 
(in 263 Xiuzhen shishu 3i.ia-5b). There Bo describes his meeting with Wu Puyun at the 
Yulong gong at Xishan gf [JL| near Nanchang (Jiangxi) in the years around 1218. One of 
the texts must therefore be spurious, and given that the Daofa huiyuan contains many 
texts apocryphally attributed to Bo Yuchan, it seems likely that Yu Ji’s colophon 
here is a forgery. It does not occur in Yu Ji’s collected works. 

Juan 109 and no contain the “Hunyuan xuanshu il/cXHr,” an exorcistic ritual, 
under the aegis of a certain Li Mingzheng IE. Juan m-13 correspond to the 
Diiing baozhu wulei qidao dafa jf A& transmitted by Zhu Meijing 

tfcWiim of the Jixian yuan academy to Li Xianyun , a high court official, the 

Thirty-sixth Heavenly Master Zhang Zongyan X i'fff (d. 1292), and others. The 
entire method appears to be based on the system of the Ttjing H ff . 



3 .B .7 The Qingwei School [ 1109 ] 



Juan 114-20 contain the “Taiji dulei yinshu A tsS Si m" SI m ” again a form of Shen- 
xiao fa by Wang Wenqing, whereas with the following “Taishang sanwu Shaoyang 
tiemian huoche wulei dafa A 2 2 2 §[ 5 1 ^ £fc [§ A X- E If A IE ” (juan 122-24), we 
are back to the subject of exorcism, this time under the auspices of Xu Xun and Wu 
Meng Shaoyang is a place in Hunan, and the deity at the origin of the magic is 
a certain Lii Bujian [HIESX The work is prefaced by Chen Nan (i22.ia-2b). Juan 
125-28 contain the “Jiuzhou sheling yanglei dafa A ‘J'H ft < n m§ IH A ?£ ,” again under 
the aegis of Xu Xun and his friends. Here the Earth Gods of the Nine Districts are 
to be appealed to in times of drought. 

After a number of smaller texts, we come to the “Taiyi zhenlei pili dafa A 2 31 ft’ If 
M Ai£” (juan 133-45). Here the forces of thunder and lightning are marshaled against 
heterodox cults and temples, great demons and perverse dragons, baleful stars, and 
other powers. There is no clear indication of authorship, but the end of juan 139 men- 
tions that it was transmitted by the Thirtieth Heavenly Master. Juan 146 contains a 
single text, the “Zhengyi zhongxiao jiashu baizhuo wulei dafa IE — ' f^ lt Erf fil; 2 

ft A ji which, at the end, has an interesting story about its origins. While in mourn- 
ing for his father, a daoshi named Zhao Lii HHi from Pingyang in Zhejiang obtains 
Thunder magic from the deity Fumo shangxiang Li zhenjun jffM E tBX RH- By 
means of a seal, the daoshi is enabled to call on the help of two heavenly marshals at 
will. More original is the work “Dongxuan yushu leiting dafa i|i) 2 2 til if M A ” 
(juan 147-53). An account of its origins written by a certain Xue Shichun j§£ ftrfi and 

dated 1296 tells us that Bo Yuchan (who here, curiously, is said to have originally 
been named Zhuge Meng H$£) reveals himself to the daughter of a certain Ma 
of the Maritime Transportation Bureau of Quanzhou. His revelation enables her to 
produce rain at the request of the famous merchant Pu Shougeng fit If fit (here identi- 
fied as executive director, zuocheng1x.7&, of this agency). Later, a servant of Pu named 
Weng Leishi Hlf 2 learned the rain-producing skills and put them to practice in her 
master’s home region of Jianning £§$ in the north of Fujian. Weng had more than 
one hundred disciples, including the author of this narrative. As van der Loon (“A 
Taoist collection”) points out, the merchants Ma and Pu from Quanzhou must both 
have been Muslims. 

Juan 154 and 155 contain the “Hunyuan liutian miaodao yiqi ruyi dafa ill 7 t A X IX 
ill — ii, IS A 2 a method that claims its origin from Lei Shizhong ffHlf 4E bao 

Mo’an f XM, alias Old Man Twinbridge ti§X A (1221-1295). The present rites were 

revealed to him by the True Lord Lu (see 297 Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian xu- 

bian 5.nb-i4a). The True Lord Lu appears to be none other than Lu Shizhong (fl. 
1120), the creator of the Yutang 2 '3’ rites (see 220 Wushang xuanyuan santian yutang 
dafa). The practice of these rites were meditative and close to those of Inner Alchemy, 
although their function was mainly exorcistic. 



[ iiio ] 3.B.7 The Qingwei School 



3.B.7 The Qingwei School [ mi ] 



Equally exorcistic is the far larger “Shangqing tianpeng fumo dafa 
jzif” (juan 156-68). The method, for once, does not originate in Fujian, but is said to 
have come from Sichuan’s Ximing shan gjHfl ill . The author does indicate, however, 
that he has studied with specialists in northern Fujian and southern Zhejiang (see the 
beginning of juan 166). The great Tianpeng deity, whose secret spell is first given in 
1016 Zhen’gao, here becomes the chief marshal of a vast number of exorcistic spirits that 
combat all kinds of evils. 

The next part of the Dcwfa huiyuan contains rites of the modern Maoshan tradition. 
Here we find a “Shangqing tongchu wuyuan sufu yuce zhengfa _h j'ft S -&] S 7C ^ 

EE EE IE ” (juan 171-78). This form of magic is also derived from the great exorcist 
tradition of Tianpeng, and it is reported to have been revealed to a daoshi named Yang 
Xizhen (mentioned already in relation to the Tianpeng fa in 156.14a). The 

Tongchu fin on Maoshan was a center for exorcistic ritual practices and in the early 
thirteenth century, the liturgist Jin Yunzhong, author of 1223 Shangqing lingbao 
dafa , appears to have been its chief. He is the editor of this ritual manual. There is an 
undated note signed by him on 173.14a and a colophon dated 1224 at the end of the 
work (i78.3a-6a). It is followed by another colophon by a certain Lu Yuanlao fUfc 
ff. The next manual, named “Shangqing wuyuan yuce jiuling feibu zhangzou bifa 

(juan 179-87) is a sequel to the preceding one. 
According to van der Loon (“A Taoist collection”), it may also have been produced by 
Jin Yunzhong. 

The “Taiyi huofu wulei dafa (juan 188-94) was edited by 

Huang Yixuan ft — -jfe and begins with his story (dated 1271) of the origin of the ritual 
tradition fayuan shiji ^ fflf : During the Tianbao era of Emperor Xuanzong of the 

Tang, a local official in Mianzhou obtained a leifa from a Holy Mother of Northern 
Yin 4 1 H H! & ■ Thereupon the official became a daoshi on Qingcheng shan # ffl |JL| in 
Sichuan. The Thunder magic was lost during the troubled period of the Five Dynasties 
(907-960), but was rediscovered later on Mount Hua. It returned to Sichuan before 
being brought to Yanping U ^ in Fujian. In 1225 Yang Defang brought it from Fujian 
to the Maoshan, where it flourished. Later Huan Xixuan obtained the method and 
reintroduced it to Chengdu (Sichuan). Many of the rites are related to nature, mar- 
shaling winds and rain, exorcising goblins, and healing the mental disorders caused 
by them. 

Juan 195 to 197 contain the “Dongshen tianyi wulei dafa fiWE — H ft The 

ritual is placed under the patronage of the Thirtieth Heavenly Master Zhang Jixian 
and is concerned with healing practices. Van der Loon (“A Taoist collection”) notes 
the instructions for the use of a spirit medium in I96.i3b-i5a. 

The next manuals are related to the Shenxiao tradition: “Shenxiao jinhuo tianding 



dafa Wlflz ik. ET (juan 198-206). The first chapter contains both an undated 
preface by Chen Daoyi — stating the connection between these rites and the 
liandu methods and a colophon giving the detailed account of the transmission by his 
disciple Liu Yu fiji, hao Qingqing jf U (fl. 1258) of this form of magic (198.28b- 
27a). Liu obtained the complete rites, not from Chen, who died in Jianjiang $J'?I in 
northern Fujian, but from Chen’s disciple Lu Ye fM M (see also 253.iob-na). The next 
chapters are attributed to Lin Lingsu himself (see, e.g., the poem signed by him in 
i99.ib-5b). The rites in this section mainly aim at curing possession by demon spirits. 
A special feature is the use of female spirit soldiers. 

Juan 210 contains the “Danyang jilian neizhi m ” introducing a special 

liandu method from Danyang, the heartland of Shangqing Taoism. In his preface 
dated 1356, the compiler Wang Xuanzhen EfESElIt, a daoshi of the Quanzhen ^ 3 t 
order, tells how he collected the materials of the specific Danyang tradition ofth tpudu 
Hr ritual from a number of teachers and combined them into the present method. 
Explaining its tide, he states (page ia) that jilian means (1) to sacrifice (ji) to the 

souls of the deceased and (2) to sublimate ( lian ) oneself. Only if one undergoes this 
sublimation can the souls of the dead be saved ( du ). At the end of the text, there is 

a colophon by Zhang Yu dated 1356. Zhang Yu, author of 7 8iXuanpin lu, lived 
from 1276 to 1342, so either the colophon is misdated or it is a forgery. Zhang, who 
himself was a student of Yu Ji, states that Wang Xuanzhen was a disciple of the great 
painter and Quanzhen master Huang Gongwang (1269-1354), whom Wang 

met in Hangzhou. 

Juan 216 has a popular ritual of the Mysterious Woman of the Nine Heavens (Jiu- 
tian xuannii thX&tt), so famous in epic literature. She is worshiped at the kitchen 
stove and has the power to protea children and heal their diseases. Equally popular 
are the rites for the expulsion of pestilence demons ( wenshen MW ; juan 119-121). The 
present work offers the sole instance in the Taoist canon of the famous sending off of 
the boat with wenshen, a ritual still celebrated frequendy in southern Taiwan. 

Juan 232-40 contain the rites of the great exorcistic deity and patron of wealth 
Zhao yuanshuai known as Black Altar (Xuan Tan £ fl ). His specific method 

consists in harmonizing (hehe $}-£), uniting beings in joy, for prosperity and heal- 
ing. Among his helpers we find the great theater deity of Fujian, Tian duyuanshuai 
ffllPlnfiltJ, chief of many other saints of the theater stage (see Schipper, “The Divine 
Jester”). 

Many of these modern exorcistic rites and cults were not easily integrated within 

I the traditional liturgical framework. This essential problem is addressed in the next 
four chapters (juan 249-52), which form a separate small manual of rules and precepts 
called “Precious Rules” ( Taishang tiantanyuge TEHEED and Taishang hundong 



[ m2 ] 3.B.7 The Qingwei School 



chiwen niiqing zhaoshu tianlii The “Precious Rules” 

first lists the different ordination grades and tides for the most important fa of the 
Tianxin zhengfa T: '(!'!£?£ and Shenxiao jsfJflr schools. It then explains in detail the 
conditions on which these grades are to be given and how they have to match previous 
ordination grades of the traditional liturgical framework. As the text states clearly 
(249.13b), the fa has to follow the Register (/« M ), and there can be no discrepancy 
between the two. Juan 250 gives detailed instruction as to how the new ritual traditions 
should be combined with the ancient ones. The text repeatedly quotes the Niiqing 
tianlii as being the fundamental law book on this and other questions. 

As their titles suggest, the next two chapters also refer to the precepts of Niiqing, so 
fundamental in the Way of the Heavenly Master (see part i.B.A). The proscriptions 
of the “Precious Rules” concern not only the clergy but also the laity, and even gods 
and demons related to the different ritual practices. This unique book of law is thus 
a continuation and development of earlier similar codes, especially the 461 Shangqing 
gusui lingwen guild and 1227 Taishang zhuguojiumin zongzhen biyao (especially the first 
juan). Both of the latter works were produced by the Tianxin zhengfa school. This is 
probably also the case for the present work, as it states that the Tianxin tradition is 
at the origin of all fa. As known, the Tianxin zhengfa was considered in Song times 
(960-1279) and later to represent the esoteric tradition transmitted by the First Heav- 
enly Master. 

Liu Yu MiE, the editor of the above-mentioned “Tianding fa,” appears again in 
“Diqi Wen yuanshuai dafa ftili® (mJcM (juan 253-56). Wen yuanshuai is the 
great Taoist saint and tutelary deity from Pingyang ^ |?§ county near present-day Wen- 
zhou. Liu was the author of the hagiography of the saint, preserved in the Daozang 
as 780 Diqi shangjiang Wen taibao zhuan , and the preface at the beginning of juan 253, 
dated 1258, is in fact the preface to this hagiography (see van der Loon, “Taoist col- 
lection,” 404)- The hagiography was originally included in the Diqi fa we have here, 
which contains a number of different materials concerning the diqi deities in general 
and Wen yuanshuai in particular. The Diqi fa was compiled by Huang Gongjin ff 
Jl, who is also the author of a Diqi xuyu lun dated 1274 (253.3b-ioa). 

Huang also wrote a biography of Liu Yu (253.ioa-i2a), which does not, however, 
contain any date. 

As an officer of the guard of the Emperor of the Eastern Peak (Yuedi M ), Wen 
yuanshuai had all the troops of Inferno (Fengdu ijliflJ) under his command and was 
therefore a most powerful exorcistic deity. A similar position in the underworld was 
at that time occupied by the saint Lord Guan H , who in later times would rise to 
great eminence in Chinese religion (juan 259-60). The final chapters of the Daofa hui- 
yuan (261-68) are entirely devoted to the rites of Fengdu and the administration of the 



3.B.7The Qingwei School [ 1113 ] 

underworld. Juan 264, 265, and 267 are signed by Zheng Zhiwei as compiler 

and by Lu Ye as commentator. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Schipper, “The Divine Jester”; Schipper, “Master Chao I-chen”; van der Loon, “A Taoist 
collection of the fourteenth century.” 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 

Huangjing jizhu (Gaoshang yuhuang benxing jijing zhu) 

10 juan 

Compiled by Zhou Xuanzhen [aj % lK ; preface dated 1585 

1440 (fasc.1060-1062) 

“Collected Commentaries to the Noble Scripture.” This is a profusely annotated 
and punctuated edition of 10 Gaoshang yuhuang benxing jijing roj _h 3 £ $ ff Hi IS 

(q.v.). It combines glosses of divine as well as human origin, at least for part of the 
work. The edition was made by Zhou Xuanzhen, a Quanzhen daoshi from Shandong, 
for Bo Yunji [=1 (Daozang mulu xiangzhu ). The editorship of Zhou is undeni- 

able, but in his preface he states that he received the text from Luo Hongxian H (Jt- 9 t 
(1504-1564). In 1585, Zhou served as compiler of the Wanli (1573-1620) supplement 
of the Taoist canon (his complete title was Da Ming jiang daojing xiu Xuanzang si 
Quanzhen dizi Shandong Zhou Xuanzhen fz E!f} M x! 

% j=[ ; see 1.17a). Work on the Wanli supplement of the Ming Daozang had begun in 
the same year. 

Luo Hongxian, zi Nianan zhuangyuan ft -laureate of 1529, was dismissed 

from public office in 1541 after a difference with the Jiajing emperor. Luo is known as 
an ardent admirer of Wang Shouren 3 E \ZL , zi Yangming I'D 0 f| (1472-1529). After his 
dismissal, Luo embraced a semireligious career as an instructor of the Three Teachings 
at his school Shilian dong LJiSP temple in Jiangxi. Among his disciples we find the 
founder of the Sanyi jiao H — fi, Lin Zhaoen # (1517-1598). In his preface, also 

dated 1585 and titled “preface to the original edition” (chuzuan qianxu fHMwifY)-, Luo 
states that only after he had left government could he turn to the writings of the Three 
Teachings. He then found that Taoism was the highest of all, and the Huangjing (i.e., 
the Yuhuang jing) was its most profound expression. Having written a commentary, 
which included the glosses “by various immortals” he had no means of publishing it. 
He therefore presented his work to Zhou Xuanzhen, who accepted it on behalf of the 
Fiftieth Heavenly Master, Zhang Guoxiang The inclusion of this commen- 

tary in the present work explains why, following the titles of juan 3, 4, and 5, we find 




[ IU4 ] 3.B.7 The Qingwei School 



the signatures of Zhang Guoxiang as editor, Luo Hongxian as supervisor, and Zhou 
Xuanzhen as compiler. 

A third, brief preface by Wang Jingcui (dated 1588) gives some more de- 

tails. Wang, who calls himself a disciple of Zhou Yunqing JS] ftjjf (an alias of Wang 
Xuanzhen?) was charged with the copying out of texts to be included in the Wanli 
supplement. He also must have had a hand in arranging the different texts that went 
into the present edition. 

The three prefaces discussed here are preceded by other prefatory matter, which 
came from the brushes of such eminent saints as Zitong dijun f ? (m 'rjf § (Wenchang 
ia), Lu Dongbin, Qiu Chuji, and the Heavenly Marshal Deng. As these dei- 
ties are also authors of parts of the commentary, they must be the “various immortals” 
mentioned in Zhou’s preface. The supernatural character of their writing may well be 
extended to the preface and the commentary by Luo Hungxian, as it is dated 1585, a full 
eight years after the scholars had been reported to have died, according toMingshi 383. 
However, Luo’s death date has not been conclusively determined. For other reasons 
as well, it is uncertain whether this might be a falsification or a product of planchette 
writing. It is possible, for instance, that part or all of the commentaries were indeed 
provided by Luo or his disciples, and that the preface was added with a later date. In 
any event, the signature of Zhang Guoxiang would not appear alongside Luo’s if the 
latter’s involvement had been completely fictitious. 

Chapter 1, besides the three prefaces, also contains the text of the “Original Tao” 
(Yuandao HUM) essay by the “Lean Immortal” (Quxian (Mf[ij) Zhu Quan 
(1378-1448; see 1483 Tianhuang zhidao taiqing yuce). There are, moreover, numerous 
short notes by Zhou Xuanzhen elucidating a number of terms and also a presentation 
of the work in his hand. 

From juan 2 on, the combined commentaries begin. As we can see from the table 
of contents on page 2, the different chapters are arranged under the original three juan 
division of the Yuhuang jing . In spite of this and other efforts to streamline the work, 
it remains very heterogeneous. Although the entire work is called Huangjing jizhu, 
from juan 2 on the title changes to Huangjing zhujie It reverts to Huang- 

jing jizhu from juan 5 onward. 

The juan 2 to 4, which are the commentary to the first juan of the Yuhuang jing, 
truly stand apart. They combine the “glosses” by numerous immortals, saints and 
deities with the commentary of Luo Hongxian. There is a note, presumably by Zhou 
Xuanzhen, that explains the way this part had been edited (4.29b-3ob). Luo’s com- 
mentary comes after that of the others and is introduced by the words yu’an jf§ (“in 

my benighted opinion”) or guanjian HJL (“according to my limited views”). His 
ideas are expressed most clearly and show the influence of Wang Yangming’s think- 



3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School [ ins ] 



ing (see, for instance, 3.3a, the quote of “someone from former times” on “applied 
knowledge,” zhizbi §(£[]). 

The remainder of the work is less clear. From juan 5 on, the glosses by the transcen- 
dent beings disappear, as well as the indications marking Luo’s commentary. Although 
following the title of juan 5 we still find the three signatures of Zhang, Luo, and Zhou, 
it is unclear who the author and editor of this and the following parts are. The tone 
of the commentary, sometimes followed by a subcommentary, is very different from 
that of the preceding part. For the time being, the question of the authorship of these 
later juan has to remain open. 

Kristofer Schipper and Yuan Bingling 



3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School 

In the history of the saints of Taoism, none is better documented than Xu Xun 
of M ■ According to legend, he lived during the Jin dynasty (265-420) and was at one 
time the local administrator of Jingyang MWi in Sichuan, hence his name Xu Jing- 
yang. The center of his legends and worship, however, is the region of the Boyang 
lake and the mountains west of Nanchang j^f H H (JL( . It is there that the veneration 
of the saint and the holy places related to his legend grew to become an important 
Taoist school (see Akizuki Kan’ei, Chugoku kinsei dbkyo no keisei ). In the Daozang , the 
earliest complete source for this tradition is 44-9 Xiaodao Wu Xu er zhenjun zhuan , 
which is believed to date from the late Tang (618-907) period (see part 2.A.6.b). The 
Way of Piety ( xiaodao #jjf) of Xu Xun and Wu Meng MS of the Tang period is 
represented by an important scripture that has been preserved in no less than three 
different versions (66 Yuanshi dongzhm cishan xiaozi baoen chengdaojing, 380 Dongxuan 
lingbao daoyao jing, and niz Taishang dongxuan lingbao baxian wang jiaojie jing). The 
“piety” here is not only filial devotion, but a form of dedication to nature in general. 

In Song times (1112), Xu Xun was canonized by Emperor Huizong as True Lord of 
Divine Merit and Marvelous Succor (Shengong miaoji chenjun Bo 

Yuchan wrote an extensive hagiography, preserved in his Yulongji M (see 263.31 

Xiuzhen shishu ), on which all lives of the saint are based. Xu’s worship developed into 
a full-fledged school known as the Pure and Clear Way of Loyalty and Piety (Jingming 
zhongxiao dao only in the late Southern Song (1127-1279) period. As 

many sources attest, the school was considered to be part of the Lingbao liturgical 
tradition, and Xu Xun, together with Ge Xuan, is named as its founder. 

The Daozang contains a large number of texts produced by the Jingming zhongxiao 



[ iii6 ] 3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School 



3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School [ 1117 ] 



dao. A remarkable feature of these texts is that, instead of being scattered in different 
parts of the canon, most of them are presented in two blocs of scriptures and rituals, 
numbers 550 to 565 in xhcfangfa fj $ section of the Dongxuan bu (with 618 and 619 
in the biaozou i!# section of the same), and 1103 to mo (and 1112) in the beginning 
of the Taiping bu. Among these texts, mo Jingming zhongxiao quanshu is of particular 
interest. 

Xuanmen baoxiao zhuijian yi H $8 # 11 M 

15 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644) 

481 (fasc. 265) 

‘Taoist Ritual for Expressing Filial Piety and Seeking Blessings for the Deceased.” 
This short requiem liturgy belongs to the Jingming zhongxiao dao jf as 

shown by the evocation of the founders of the school (3b) : Lan gong fll , Chen mu 
M M , and Xu Xun (Taishi Jsi sfe ). 

The first ritual is a daochang }|ff§ (ia-ua), the second a jiao g£ . Although certainly 
modern (both start with a buxu # /Jj? hymn), they are of the regular Lingbao type. 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Shengong miaoji zhenjun liwen j'f tj] tyj jj§ 31 It $! JC 

10 fols. 

518 (fasc. 293) 

“Ritual of Homage to the True Lord of Wonderful Succor and Divine Merit [Xu 
Xun].” The canonization title given on page ia, Jiuzhou duxian taishi gaoming dashi 
zhidao xuanying shengong miaoji zhenjun 

corresponds to that awarded by Yuan Chengzong in 1295. 

The text recited for lauding the saint alternates with seven-character verses of a 
narrative nature, similar to those found in later Precious Scrolls ( baojuan 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Xu zhenjun shou lian xingshen Shangqing bidao fayao jiewen 

2 fols. 

550 (fasc. 313) 

“Rubrics of the Essential Method of the Ultimate Shangqing Way, Received by 
the True Lord Xu [Xun] for the Refining of Body and Soul.” This is a small guide to 
meditation and exorcism in a liturgical context, in three paragraphs with a commen- 
tary. The preface stresses the Lingbao filiation of this text, and some verses quote the 1 
Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing (for instance, 2b, lines 2 and 4). This filiation 



is in keeping with the tradition of the Jingming zhongxiao school to which the text 
belongs. 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Tianshu yuan dusi xuzhi ling ^ K ^ n] 44 

4 fols. 

551 (fasc. 313) 

Tianshu yuan dusi xuzhi jrc T: K Si b] 

6 fols. 

532 (fasc. 313) 

Lingbao jingming tianshu yuan dusifayuan xuzhi fawen 

4 fols. 

553 (fasc. 313) 

“Heavenly Chancellery Documents of the Pure and Clear Way.” These three liturgi- 
cal documents of the Qingming zhongxiao school address the Heavenly Chancellery 
(Tianshu yuan). The first text, ssi Tianshuyuan dusi xuzhi ling, provides the nominative 
list of the officials in the different departments as well as their tides and assignments; 
SS2 Tianshu yuan dusi xuzhi ge contains the regulations for the transmission of docu- 
ments and the grid for promotion, according to merit, in the different offices (this 
is called the qiange S7 the black, or popular, code). The black code is followed by 
rules, given in a discursive form (6a-b). Finally, SS 3 Lingbao jingming tianshuyuan dusi 
fayuan xuzhi fawen gives a number of simple directions for meditation, for verification 
of the identity of spirits (Jiucha f -4 W : ), for transmitting messages, with a spell in the 
vernacular (3b). 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Lingbao jingming yuan iiaoshi Zhou zhengong qiqing huayi 

9 fols. 

By Zhou Fangwen If] jjjC 

554 (fasc. 313) 

“Questions for Unification by the Instructor from the Pure and Clear Hall, the 
Perfected Master Zhou.” Zhou Fangwen is also the author of ss 6 Lingbao jingming 
huangsu shou shiyi bijue and is thought to have lived in Southern Song (1127-1279) 
times. The questions presented here concern aspects of Taoist practice, liturgical as 
well as self-cultivation. 

Kristofer Scbipper 




[ iii8 ] 3 .B .8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School 



3 .B .8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School [ 1119 ] 



Gaoshang yuegong taiyin yuanjun xiaodao xianwang lingbao jingming 

hu a ngsushu^±.n^±m7tm^m^s.mmmmmm 

10 juan 

Commentary by Fu Feiqing 

555 (fasc. 314) 

“Yellow and White Book of the Pure and Clear School, Revealed by the Immortal 
King of the Way of Filial Piety, Original Lord of the Supreme Yin of the Moon Palace 
on High.” This is a theoretical and practical treatise for daily hygiene for laymen, with 
explicit sexual overtones (see, for instance, 8.1b and 9.ia-b). 

The author of the commentary, himself a master of the Jingming zhongxiao 
school, is otherwise unknown. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Lingbao jingming huctngsu shu shiyi bijue 

13 fols. 

By Zhou Fangwen |W| jj 3 ^ 

556 (fasc. 314) 

“Secret Formulas and Glosses of the Yellow and White Book of the Pure and Clear 
School.” The author of this work requests the founder of the school, Xu Xun (here 
tided zhenshi ya ), to clarify certain points of SSS Gaoshang yuegong taiyin yuanjun 
xiaodao xianwang lingbao jingming huangsu shu, in relation to the theories of such 
well-known treatises as the Zhong-Lu chuandao ji (see 263 Xiuzhen shishu 14—16). On 
10b, Zhou relates the different methods of Inner Alchemy he has obtained. None of 
the dates and persons mentioned have been identified. 

Kristofer Schipper 



Taishang lingbao jingming rudao pin A-hitlt£PMAjltira 
5 fols. 

557 (fasc. 315) 

“Instructions for Novices in the Pure and Clear School.” The instructions contain 
indications regarding the first ordination into the Jingming zhongxiao (J# Pfl l£ # 
school. 

Kristofer Schipper 



Lingbao jingming yuan zhenshi migao M H ff* W ^ SI 35 In 
3 fols. 

558 (fasc. 315) 

“Secret Instructions by the Perfected Master of the Pure and Clear Hall.” These 
instructions, all transmitted by the patriarch Xu Xun to Zhou Fangwen jnJA A, 



comprise an updated list of dignitaries in the different departments and sanctuaries 
of the Jingming yuan, a talisman given to the medium Yang Wenqing fj§3£| IP in the 
year jiyou EM (1129?), for the healing of possession and plague, and finally a recipe 
for pine needles in a diet of abstention from cereals. 

Kristofer Schipper 




figure 57. “Seal of the Most High Pure and Clear [Jingming] Order” and 
“Seal of the Master of Rites of the Jingming School” ($S9 2a). Ming reprint of 
1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/454) 

Taishang lingbao jingming fa yinshi A _h If M M A 

2 fols. 

559 (fasc. 315) 

“Model for the Ritual Seals of the Pure and Clear School.” This very short text 
contains the drawings for two liturgical seals, to be used on memorials (fig. 57). There 
is a long preface by Xu Xun, the legendary founder of the Jingming school, in 

which he claims to have written a Taoist scripture in thirty-five chapters. This “Preface 
to the Jingming Ritual” (Taishang lingba jingming fa xu A _h ?£/A), which 

does not mention the seals, probably belongs to another text. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Lingbao jingming dafa wandao yuzhang bijue M (Ji M A iA A ¥ S 

38 fols. 

560 (fasc. 315) 

“Secret Instructions for Precious Stanzas of the Myriad Ways, of the Great Ritual 
of the Pure and Clear School.” In this collection, a large number of esoteric names and 
correspondances are given for the gods and the cosmogony of the Lingbao liturgy. 
On 9b-i4a, for example the Thirty-two Heavens are placed in relationship with the 
stances of the Zhutian neiyin If A M ej of / Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing, 
and each verse is in mrn related to one of the Sixty-four Hexagrams of the Tijing. 





[ H 20 ] 3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School 



3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School [ 1121 ] 



The second part of the text gives instructions about the meditational practices 
related to these esoteric formulas. 



Kristofer Schipper 



Taishang lingbao jingming bifa plan A _h 1 

2 juan 

561 (fasc. 315) 

“Secret Rites of the Pure and Clear School.” 
The first chapter (pin n) of this work contains 
the prepatory rites of burning incense and 
invoking the gods, ending Flying Steps (feibu 
jftA), with a complicated exercise in cosmic 
dancing (fig. 58). 

The second chapter contains very detailed 
instructions on a dharani - based meditation 
called, respectively, the Lingshu shangpian fi 
UJlii (ia-8a) and Lingshu xiapian HUT 
H (8b-i4a). This text is mentioned in 1103 
Taishang lingbao jingming dongshen shcmgpin 
jing 2.10a. The pseudo-Sanskrit formulas cor- 
respond to the names of the gods of the body. 
The practice, which appears to be intended 
for the laity, is highly esoteric and complex. 

Kristofer Schipper 



'mmm 



lift W c*f tfr JV A*" 




m 



* 

4^ 



figure 58. Choreography of the Flying 
Steps, for performance in the sacred area 
{S61 8b). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy 
of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. 
(Chinois 9546/556) 



Lingbao jingming xinxiu jiulao shenyinfumo bifa 

9 fols. 

By He Shouzheng fnjyfjjff; 1131 

562 (fasc. 315) 

“New Version from the Pure and Clear School of the Secret Rites for the Quelling 
of Demons by Means of the Divine Seal of the Nine Ancients.” He Shouzheng, in his 
preface, gives an account of the origin of the Jingming Bfl school. It proceeded from 
Mother Chen Hf3, who transmitted her healing rites to Xu Xun. 

After many generations, the original texts had become full of errors, and therefore, 
in the year 1129, the Six True Patriarchs revealed again the secret rites of the Jing- 
ming school and appointed the Immortal Minister Dongshen (1511$ fill f|l as Training 
Scholar. A few years later, at the request of their disciples, the Patriarchs revealed this 



new vesion of the old practice. (On He Shouzheng, see Akizuki Kan’ei, Chugoku kinsei 
dokyo no keisei, 120 ff.) 

The first part of the text concerns the divine seals and gives instructions for exor- 
cism. The second part deals with simple breathing techniques for private practice. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang lingbao jingming feixian duren jingfa 

A±S«MlfiIiJf AIMS 

5 juan 

563 (fasc. 316) 

Taishang lingbao jingming feixian duren jingfa shili 

a ± m » m m jh m « a m m m m 

7 fols. 

Commentary attributed to Xu Jingyang fftMWt (Xu Xun IfM) 

564 (fasc. 317) 

“Liturgical Exegesis of the Book of Salvation, by the Flying Immortals of the Pure 
and Clear School of the Most High Lingbao Tradition.” This esoteric commentary on 
j Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing was revealed to He Shouzheng fnj yf Iff in 
1131 on the Xishan H [I| , at the height of the crisis at the end of the Northern Song 
(960-1127) dynasty (see the preface to 562 Lingbao jingming xinxiu jiulao shenyin fumo 
bifa; mo Jingming zhongxiao quanshu 1.19b; and Akizuki Kan’ei, Chugoku kinsei dokyo 
no keisei, 122 ff.). However, as Akizuki remarks, early on in the work (1.3a) Xu Xun is 
given the tide Jiuzhou duxian taishi gaoming dashi zhidao xuanying shengong miaoji 
zhenjun A. 'J’H ^Hlij A ^ iWi Ej/j A A iM A Jj/j fc!' B II , a form that corresponds 
to his canonization in 1295. The work therefore must have been revised at a later 
date. 

The exegesis offers detailed comments, not only on the esoteric meanings of each 
paragraph, but also on the stages of initiation and ordination associated with each part 
of the scripture. The text therefore gives some insight into the liturgical organization 
of the school. 

Among its ritual uses, we find instructions in the fifth chapter on which parts of the 
text should be eaten, on specific days. 

The 564 Shili is of a philosophical nature and addresses such topics as the cosmic 
meaning of writing. 

Kristofer Schipper 








[ H22 ] 3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School 



3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School [ 1123 ] 



Taishang jingming yuan buzou zhiju taixuan dusheng xuzhi 

18 fols. 

Commentary attributed to Xu Jingyang ffjfjl R§ (Xu Xun ffM) 

565 (fasc. 317) 

“Vade Mecum of the Chancellery of Highest Mystery for Promotion and Assign- 
ments of Office in the Pure and Clear Hall.” This almanac of the bureaucratic orga- 
nization of the Jingming yuan, with its lists of officials and grids for promotion is an 
appendix to the S63-S64 Taishang lingbao jingming feixian duren jingfct (shili), which 
refers to the present work on i.22b-22a, and 1.24a. Folios 9b-i4b are also reproduced 
in ssi Titmshu yuan dusi xuzhi ling. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Lingbao jingming yuan xingqian shi fi U BJJ ^ f? jj| 

18 fols. 

Attributed to Zhou Fangwen JS| fj JC . ; Southern Song (1127-1279) 

618 (fasc. 340) 

Tianshu yuan dusi xuzhi xingqian ^15 WJ ^ 5® 5^ 

4 fols. 

619 (fasc. 340) 

“Models for the Dispatching [of Documents] of the Pure and Clear School in the 
Lingbao tradition.” This work bears the signature of the hereditary instructor of the 
Hall of Pure Light, Zhou zhenren. Zhou, probably a divine being, is also indicated as 
author of ss4 Lingbao jingming yuan jiaoshi Zhou zhengong qiqing huayi and ss6 Lingbao 
jingming huangsu shu shiyi bijue. As stated by Akizuki Kan’ei ( Chugoku kinsei dokyo no 
keisei, 201), the canonization tide of Xu Xun given on page 11b suggests that this text 
was written between the years 1112 and 1295. It therefore belongs to the Jingming jf# 
Hfj school revelations of the Southern Song period. 

The text contains a number of models for liturgical documents: tallies for the 
armies of the Tianshu yuan, marching orders for transporting sums of money to the 
Heavenly Treasure House ( tianku jzM), mandates for arrest of demons in the case 
of possession-caused illness, lists of rewards (xianzhuang given to the heavenly 
soldiers in thanks for their assistance, an attestation of ordination for disciples (fol- 
lowed by the Ten Precepts they have to observe), an additional attestation for the 
transmission of certain holy scriptures, several secret spells, and other texts linked to 
initiation. 

Among the scriptures mentioned in the attestation for ordination (12a) are 363-S64 
Taishang lingbao jingming feixian duren jingfa (shili) and ss6 Lingbao jingming huangsu 



shu shiyi bijue, as well as an unidentified Lingbao dafa MUf in four juan. 619 Tian- 

shu yuan dusi xuzhi xingqian shi is a short vade mecum giving a few practical indica- 
tions for the writing and handling of liturgical documents. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang lingbao jingming dongshen shangpin jing 

2 juan 

1103 (fasc. 756) 

“Superior Scripture of Pervading Divinity, of the Pure and Clear School of the 
Lingbao Tradition.” Akizuki Kan’ei regards this work as “the fundamental scripture of 
the Xu Xun movement of the Song [960-1279]” and identifies it as one of the revela- 
tions made to He Shouzheng f6JvF|§ ( Chugoku kinsei dokyo no keisei, 241, 125). 

The text, divided into thirty-five paragraphs, is of a doctrinal nature. Paragraph 29 
indicates that the Jingming scriptures j# BFJ number forty chapters in all, and praises 
the efficacy of the recitation of the Lingshu erpian flit — H, probably a reference to 
the text of the second chapter of j 61 Taishang lingbao jingming fa ( Lingshu shangpian 
2.ia-8a and Lingshu xiapian 2.8b-i4a). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Akizuki Kan’ei, Chugoku kinsei dokyo no keisei; Akizuki Kan’ei, “Jomyodo keisei ron ko.” 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang lingbao jingming yuzhen shu zhenjing 

3 fols. 

1104 (fasc. 756) 

“True Scripture of the Pillar of Precious Truth, from the Pure and Clear School of 
the Lingbao Tradition.” This is a short didactic poem in seven-character verse, with an 
introduction presenting its author, “the immortal Danyang zi TJK Danyang is 
also quoted in $62 Lingbao jingming xinxiujiulao shenyinfumo bifa (Ta ff), by He Shou- 
zheng fnjvfif . The poem describes a meditation practice on the Hall of Pure Light, 
accompanied by the dance of Flying Steps (feibu M'P)- 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang lingbao jingming daoyuan zhengyinjing 

2 fols. 

1105 (fasc. 756) 

“Scripture of the Orthodox Seal of the Foundation of the Tao, from the Pure and 
Clear School.” This is a short doctrinal treatise, in rhymed, four-character verses, of 



1 




[ //24 ] 3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School 



a philosophical nature. The text breaks off in the middle of a verse at the end of page 
ib, and a section corresponding to part of the printing block numbered feng (3.3) 

appears to be missing. 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Taishana lingbao jingming tianzun shuo yuwen jing 

4 fols. 

1106 (fasc. 756) 

“Scripture for the Control of Plagues, spoken by the Pure and Clear Heavenly 
Worthy, in the Lingbao Tradition.” This short scripture is modeled on the traditional 
Lingbao texts. Instead of placing the reveladon in some remote cosmic era, the text 
says that it took place in the year jiyou 2 M , corresponding to 1129, the year in which 
He Shouzheng f»J yp fa received the Jingming scriptures on Xishan (see the preface to 
S62 Lingbao jingming xinxiu jiulao shenyin Junto bifa). 

At the request of the “new disciple” Huiwen zhenren M A R A, the Tianzun ex- 
plains why even the faithful are not spared the plague that rages on Earth. However, 
a new spell and talisman, obligingly copied out by Xu Xun, is given to the disciple 
as a means of protection. 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Taishang lingbao shouru jingming sigui mingjian jing 

A±M»1f AMMBJJM 

5 fols. 

1107 (fasc. 756) 

“Book of the Fourfold Mirror: An Introduction to the Pure and Clear School, in 
the Lingbao Tradition.” Four mirrors arranged in a square around the adept {sigui 
mingjing R Iff] ) are a common aid to the practice of ecstatic meditation (see, e.g., 

1207 Shangqing mingjian zhenjing ia ff.). In the tide of the present work Jian Hi stands 
for jing M, in avoidance of a Song (960-1279) taboo. 

This is a short philosophical and moral treatise in the classical style, comprising four 
paragraphs (hence the dde). It was intended as an introduction to the thought of the 
Jingming zhongxiao ,‘£ school. 

Kristofer Scbipper 



3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School [ 112s ] 



Taishang lingbao jingming jiuxian shuijing A h M !? (A Rl A Jill A jjg[ 

6 fols. 

1108 (fasc. 765) 

“Book of Water, from the Nine Immortals of the Pure and Clear School.” This is a 
short essay on the element water and its cosmological role, compared to that of blood 
in the human body. The reference to Nine Immortals in the tide is not explained. 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Taishang lingbao jingming zhonghuang bazhu jing 

aamumaham 

6 fols. 

1109 (fasc. 756) 

“Scripture on the Eight Pillars of the Yellow Center of the Pure and Clear School.” 
This essay on the theory of Tending Life techniques comprises eight paragraphs, hence 
the tide. The Yellow Center is seen as the rectifying norm, the nexus of the structure 
of the energies of the universe and the body. 

According to his biography, Jingming EJfj patriarch Liu Yu (1257-1308) transmit- 

ted the Zhonghuang dadao baji zhenquan Aft Axl A® Rife to his disciple Huang 
Yuanji >5 JcR (see mo Jingming zhongxiao quanshu 1.22b). This revelation may well 
have been the present work, as the sayings of Liu Yu ( Tuzhen xiansheng yulu A [11 
in mo Jingming zhongxiao quanshu 3-5) contains a paragraph devoted to 
the zhonghuang baji that shows similarities to the present work. Moreover, the text 
uses xuanwu A A for the emblem of the North, in the place of zhenwu fll ft£ in Song 
(960-1279) texts. 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Jingming zhongxiao quanshu AA 

6 juan 

By Huang Yuanji ]|r A p? , hao Zhonghuang xiansheng A Si 9 t A (1271-1325); 

edited by Xu Hui hao Danjiong daoren fl-ftiM A; introduction dated 1327 

mo (fasc. 757) 

“Complete Works of the Pure and Clear School.” Xu Hui (1291-1350) was a disciple 
of Huang Yuanji, the successor of Liu Yu (1257-1308), author of the renewal of the 
Jingming zhongxiao jffEIIjJiS# school in Yuan (1279-1368) times. In his introduction 
(dated 1327), Xu tells how he collected the sayings of his master, as well as those of 
Liu Yu. Xu added a number of documents revealed by planchette or other writings 
in Yuan times, edited them, and had the whole collection printed. The present edition, 
however, must have been reedited later, as Xu Hui’s own biography has been added 
to those of his masters (i.27b-3ia). 




I 



[ 1126 ] 3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School 

Xu’s preface is preceded by no less than six prefaces by different scholars of the 
Yuan period: Zhang Gui $|fi (1264-1327), Zhao Shiyan (1260-1336), Yu Ji 

IMM (1272-1348), Teng Bin M'M. (also written H®, a Hanlin academician of the 
years 1308-1313, who later became a daoshi), Zeng Xunshen W H ^ (1282-1330), and 
finally a certain Peng Ye $2 id , a local academician. These prefaces have been studied 
by Akizuki Kan’ei (Chugoku kinsei dokyo no keisei, 148-55). The first juan contains a 
number of biographies of the patriarchs of the school, and juan two has a number 
of planchette revelations. Juan 3-5 have the sayings of Liu Yu ( Tuzhen xiansheng 
yulu 5. R devoted to a wide range of topics, from self-cultivation to 

liturgy and exorcism. The last juan contains the sayings of Huang Yuanji ( Zhong - 
huang xicmsheng wenda compiled by his disciple Chen Tianhe |Sj| 

This collection constitutes an important source for the history of the school in Yuan 
times. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Hata Shinobu, “Gendai jomyodo.” 

Kristofer Scbipper 

Taiwei xianjun gongguo gefsiW fill S 

14 fols. 

By Youxuan zi X 2 C T ; 1171 

186 (fasc. 78) 

“Table of Merits and Offences [Revealed] by Taiwei Xianjun.” In his preface, 
Youxuan zi states that in the year 1171, under the Jin dynasty (1115-1234), he ascended 
in a dream to the Purple Palace ( zifu ), where he received from Taiwei xianjun the 

standards for merits and offences and was admonished to pass them on to believers. 
After waking up, he noted them down— without adding any ideas of his own. The 
preface is signed “Youxuan zi from the Wuyou studio of the Huizhen Hall on Xishan 
ffi ill XST - -” Since the Xishan in Jiangxi was not under Jin rule, the 

author’s reference to the Huizhen Hall may point to his affiliation with the Jingming 
iff EjJJ tradition there (cf. Akizuki Kan’ei, Chugoku kinsei dokyo no keisei, 197 ff.). 

Thirty-six kinds of meritorious and thirty-nine kinds of impious deeds (divided into 
four categories each) are listed in the text, ranging on a scale of less than 1 to more than 
100 points. The author recommends recording one’s good and bad deeds in separate 
columns in a ledger every night, establishing a provisional balance once a month and 
an accumulative balance once a year. The aim of such bookkeeping is to become aware 
of one’s actions and to change one’s conduct accordingly. 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1127 ] 

The present text is the earliest preserved of its kind and served as a model for the 
various tables of merits and offences that were popular, especially in Ming (1368-1644) 
and Qing (1644-1912) times. 

Hans -Hermann Schmidt 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Brokaw, Ledgers of Merit and Demerit, 43-52; Sakai Tadao, “Koka no kenkyu.” 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 

The founder of the Quanzhen school, Wang Zhe 3 :S, hew Chongyang zi (1113- 
1170), decided after a failed career in both the military and the civil service under the 
Jin dynasty (1115-1234) to lead a hermetic life in the Zhongnan shan $£j^f[i| mountains 
(southern Shaanxi). In 1159 he had two encounters with immortals (usually under- 
stood to be Lu Dongbin and Zhongli Quan), adopted a severe asceticism, and 
obtained the Tao. In 1167 Wang went to the tip of Shandong peninsula to preach. 
There he converted a wealthy notable, Ma Danyang (1123-1184), who became his 
prominent disciple under the surname Danyang zi. Wang converted others as well. 
Among these disciples, hagiography singles out the Qizhen -fc J! (Seven Zhenren). 
In 1170, Wang Zhe took his four core disciples on a journey back to Shaanxi, but 
he died in modern Kaifeng en route. While in Shandong, Wang Zhe established 
the Quanzhen (Complete Truth) school, named after his hermitage, and founded lay 
congregations ( hui #) based on the Three Teachings. Although well corroborated, 
the sources for Wang’s biography are rather late; we have no funerary stele before 1232, 
and the first hagiographic work in the canon concerning him is 173 Jinlitm zhengzong 
ji , written in 1241. Although he seems to have been a very impressive personality, 
Wang seems to have become famous largely through the teachings of his disciples. 
The main work related to him is 1133 Chongyang quanzhen ji, a large collection of his 
poems, possibly compiled while he was still alive. Other works deal with Wang’s spe- 
cial relationship with Ma Danyang and were edited by Ma’s circle: 1134 Chongyang 
jiaohuaji , uss Chongyang fenli shihuaji , and the probably apocryphal 1138 Chongyang 
zhenren shou Danyang ershisijue. Two other works are also attributed to Wang; 1136 
Chongyang zhenren jinguanyusuojue, concerned with neidan jf techniques, and the 

programmatic 1233 Chongyang lijiao shiwu lun. He is, furthermore, credited with other 
books in later hagiographies. It is possible that, in the course of time, some of these 
lost anthologies were merged in larger anthologies such as 1133 Chongyang quanzhen 




[ U28 ] 3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order 

ji. The unsystematic nature of these compilations is indicated by the duplication of 
numerous poems in different texts, for example in both 1133 Chongyang qucmzhenji 
and 1134 Chongyang jiaohua ji. 

Ma Danyang is, after Wang Zhe, the most prolific author in this corpus. His 
poems are collected in 1142 Jianwuji, 1149 Dongxuan jinyu ji, and uso Danyang shen- 
guang can, and his speeches in ios7 Danyang zhenren yulu and 1234 Danyang zhenren 
zhiyan. We know little about the editorial history of Ma’s works since none of them 
except uso Danyang shenguang can has a preface. Ma’s funerary steles mention his 
poetic skills but quote no title. On the other hand, 174 Jinlian zhengzong xianyuan 
xiangzhuan quotes quite a few tides we can no longer trace. In contrast, the other male 
aposdes of Quanzhen all have literary collections : Wang Chuyi 5 EJH — (ns2 Tunguang 
ji), Liu Chuxuan (1141 Xianleji, as well as the didactic treatise 1038 Wuwei qingjing 
Changsheng zhenren zhizhen yulu). Tan Chuduan (1160 Shuiyunji), Hao Datong 
(1161 Taiguji), and Qiu Chuji (1148-1227; 1139 Panxiji). Sun Buer the only 

female disciple, is absent from the corpus, together with the entire, and considerable, 
feminine part of the Quanzhen school. We have Sun’s poems only in 1100 Minghe 
yuyin, but some of these compositions seem to have originated in planchette writing. 
A problem of attribution is raised by 1036 Jin zhenren yulu, which is quoted in Wang 
Zhe’s works and also quotes him: it may be a compilation of texts by different authors 
contemporary to Wang. 

At first a spiritual movement outside established Taoist institutions, the Quanzhen, 
under the leadership of preachers such as Ma Danyang and Wang Chuyi lElM — , 
soon attracted many converts and became an independent order. After some conflict in 
the 1190s, the Jin state eventually recognised the Quanzhen order, permitting it to de- 
velop its monastic foundations in the open. Under the leadership of Qiu Chuji, the 
movement expanded widely and was given a strong and centralized structure. In 1220, 
the Mongol emperor Genghis Khan, having already invaded part of northern China, 
called on Qiu to visit him. This he did, with eighteen of his prominent disciples. They 
met near Samarkand, after a long and difficult journey. Genghis was pleased to grant 
him privileges and comprehensive authority over China’s monks ( chujia £i}' 4 c), an 
edict that was to raise much controversy. The whole journey is recorded in 1429 Chang- 
chun zhenren xiyouji , the dialogues with Genghis Khan in 176 Xuanfeng qinghui lu. 
After these momentous events, a second generation of disciples oversaw the greatest 
expansion of the order. 

This second generation is represented in the canon by a number of texts. From Yin 
Zhiping ^ (1169-1251), Qiu Chuji’s heir to the patriarch’s seat, we have an an- 

thology (1146 Baoguangji) and a collection of sayings (1310 Qinghe zhenren heiyouyulu) . 
A disciple of Ma Danyan g composed 1143 Caotangji , and a disciple of Liu Chuxuan 
wrote i264Lifeng Uwrenji. Wang Zhijin, another disciple of Qiu Chuji, who also 



3 . B .9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1129 ] 

studied with H ao D ATO N g , is the subject of ios 9 Panshan Qiyun Wang zhenren yulu . 
A disciple of Wang Zhijin authored the 1140 Yunshanji. From later generations 
come 267 Shangsheng xiuzhen sanyao and two works by Quanzhen patriarchs of the 
late thirteenth century, ii47Xiyunji and 1073 Daochanji. 

Apart from these works by well-known masters, the canon also contains other 
texts from the same period (1220-1280) whose authors are clearly identified with the 
Quanzhen order but not well documented historically. They are 247 Huizhen ji, 248 
Qizhenji, 1064 Dongyuanji, 1144 Ziranji, 114s Xuanxu zi mingzhenji, and iisi Wuzhen 
ji. These second-generation authors were not all mere imitators. If they drew on the 
same sources of inspiration as the patriarchs, their poetry shows an evolution in style 
and doctrine, especially concerning the life of the hermit. As Quanzhen enlarged its 
audience and gained control of the large ordination monasteries, emphasis shifted 
from hermetic withdrawal to community life. Selfless striving for merit is the essential 
theme of works of this period, and Quanzhen’s social action was initially rewarded 
with unprecedented political autonomy. This privilege started to be restricted in the 
1250s, in reponse to the Quanzhen courtship of Buddhists. The movement was se- 
verely curtailed in the early 1280s when, in a fit of rage and sudden reversal of policy, 
the emperor Kublai ordered its canon burned. These changes in court politics, how- 
ever, did not affect Quanzhen entrenchment in the countryside. Indeed, in the early 
fourteenth century, the order would recover its official patronage. Meanwhile, the 
establishment and administration of large ordination monasteries called for monastic 
rules. It was during the period of consolidation in the early fourteenth century that 123s 
Quanzhen qinggui , a compendium of rules, and 1229 Quanzhen zuobojiefa , a technical 
manual explaining the use of a method for collective meditation, were compiled. 

Although political support for the Quanzhen declined in the late thirteenth cen- 
tury, the reunification of China in 1279 brought it into full contact with the southern 
schools, among which it immediately gained considerable prestige. The various orders 
had in fact been acquainted for some time. As early as 1260 and 1264, masters of the 
Quanzhen and Southern school (Nanzong j^j^f) traditions, along with other emi- 
nent Taoists, were included in comprehensive lineage charts. Travels of Taoist masters 
across the border are not well documented, but books did make the journey. Van der 
Loon points to a Southern Song (1127-1279) work, the Taishang shilu (see 

the article on 770 Hunyuan shengji ) included in the Quanzhen-sponsored canon of 
1244 (VDL 56). The inclusion of 1039 Panshan Qiyun Wang zhenren yulu (an eminently 
Quanzhen text) in the Nanzong anthology 263 Xiuzhen shishu must also have come 
shortly after the reunification of China (1279), if not before. Quanzhen did spread 
to southern China, but it never managed to establish large networks of communi- 
ties there. Instead, it mostly operated small but renowned cloisters attached to large 
Zhengyi centers in the south. 




[ H30 ] 3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order 



I 



3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1131 ] 



Not many post-reunification Quanzhen texts are clearly dateable. There is 276 Xiyi 
zhimi lun whose author, Niu Daochun, also wrote a commentary (727 Wenshi zbenjing 
zhu) and the hagiographic account 174 Jinlian zhengzong xianyucm xiangzhuan . The 
major legacy of that period is identified with the more speculative works of southern 
authors such as Li Daochun, Miao Shanshi MH 0 #, Chen Zhixu, Wang Jie 
(mid-fourteenth century), and Jin Zhiyang (1276-1336), who was raised in the 

Nanzong tradition and also initiated into Quanzhen pedagogy, thus claiming double 
affiliation. Although not a priori Quanzhen Taoists, these authors produced some of 
the most remarkable premodern Taoist literature, and eventually became regarded 
as authorities in modern Quanzhen. Beside this syncretic tradition, the continuity 
of the classical early Quanzhen tradition, at least during the early Ming (1368-1644), 
is documented in 1076 Suiji yinghua lu , a yulu by He Daoquan fnf xl (i3i9?-i399). 

Encyclopedic works from the Ming such as 1232 Daomen shigui and 1483 Tianhuang 
zhidao taiqingyuce also attest to the broad acceptance of Quanzhen practice and texts 
among all Taoist circles. 

The comparatively small number of Quanzhen texts, amounting to less than 4 
percent of the canon’s volume, does not reflect the historical importance of the order 
that since the late twelfth century has come to be regarded as a vital element of the 
Taoist tradition. And yet the sixty-odd texts discussed here, casually scattered in vari- 
ous compilations, provide a huge wealth of historical and doctrinal information that 
to this day has scarcely begun to be explored by scholars. The major problem with 
Quanzhen writings lies in their unsystematic nature. Quanzhen is not a revelation, and 
there is no founding scripture on which the whole tradition can be said to rest. The 
fact that the school produced no classic was considered a blemish by the early Ming 
theoretician Zhao Yizhen. For a school with a deep sense of its unity and mission, 
the corpus left by Quanzhen is dispersed and heterogeneous. 

It is not easy to define a Quanzhen text. No common formal criteria seem to link 
the corpus together. Reference to the patriarchs (most often Wang Zhe and Qiu 
Chuji) is frequent but not systematic. Neither is the word Quanzhen a reliable in- 
dicator: on one hand it is claimed by authors primarily affiliated with other schools, 
and on the other, it is absent from many core Quanzhen texts. Its synonyms include 
Golden Lotus (Jinlian ) and, more frequently. Mysterious Movement (Xuanfeng 
^M). It is indeed a rather vague term, and as Hachiya Kunio points out, its use by 
Wang Zhe himself is not very consistent (. Kindai dokyo, 15). To indicate “becom- 
ing a Quanzhen Taoist,” one employed the usual terms for entering the religious life 
or monastic orders ( chujia Hlf^ or rudcw Ail). For die doctrine of the Quanzhen 
masters, the nonsectarian wuwei qingjing MM'MW was most commonly used. It 
is, moreover, hazardous to identify a Quanzhen text on the basis of doctrine. Their 
prominent features, neidan and Three Teachings “syncretism,” are common to many 



writings of that period, including the Nanzong. The patriarch of this southern lineage, 
Zhang Boduan, is often quoted in Quanzhen works (although more often in 
second generation texts), and the two schools share the same theoretical foundations. 
Some scholars have tried to distinguish between the “Northern” (original Quanzhen) 
and “Southern” schools on the basis of their different emphases regarding xing ft 
and ming np (mind and body) cultivation; this has been put into perspective by more 
recent research (see especially Chen Bing, “Jin Yuan Quanzhen dao” 538-40). 

The early Quanzhen placed great emphasis on morals. Their scriptures hold forth 
about karma and the necessity of accumulating merit over many generations to attain 
truth and dismiss all practices but the purification of the mind. This has led some con- 
temporaries to identify Quanzhen with Chan (see 1066 Xuanzong zhizhi wanfa tonggui 
3.7b: “Quanzhen practices the Sudden Way, it is therefore a sort of Buddhism”). This 
image of early Quanzhen as pure moral asceticism might primarily reflect a sociologi- 
cal distinction rather than a doctrinal choice. The Quanzhen order was at that time 
addressing very large lay congregations, and the “recorded sayings” (yulu) bear wit- 
ness to their popular audiences. Most extant non-Quanzhen yulu, by contrast, are 
esoteric discussions between advanced adepts. The same differences can be observed 
among the audiences of Quanzhen and non-Quanzhen poetry. A few theoretical texts 
by Quanzhen authors (e.g., 1161 Taiguji, 247 Huizhenji 1, 248 Qizhen ji 3), however, 
show that the school’s propogators were not averse to the kind of speculative writ- 
ings for which the Southern school (Nanzong) is justly famous. The most sensible 
way to identify a Quanzhen text, then, would be by affiliation of the author with the 
Quanzhen organization, with the help of historical sources, notably epigraphy. Unfor- 
tunately, many texts in the canon have either authors who are otherwise unknown, or 
no indication of authorship at all. Thus we have a number of texts that seem related 
to the Quanzhen movement, but that cannot be incorporated into a strictly defined 
corpus. The present set of some sixty well-identified texts, however, is large enough 
to allow for a description of the major genres. These are (1) hagiography, (2) recorded 
saying (yulu) and collected works, and (3) didactic writings, covering both precepts 
and practices. 

One of the most remarkable achievements of the early Quanzhen was the edition 
of the 1244 canon, almost without state support, in a very short period of time and 
under troubled conditions. It is difficult to have a clear idea of the contents of this 
canon, but available evidence suggests that the compilers did not interfere with the 
traditional Three Caverns and Four Auxiliaries (sandong sifit 22 M 0 ffi ) partition, nor 
did they attempt to fill the canon with their own literature. At most, they added a few 
hagiographic works at the end. This process was completely in line with the nature of 
the Quanzhen movement: the masters respected the canon and strove to enlarge its 
diffusion, but they considered their own writings to be extracanonical. The Quanzhen 



[ ini ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 

order, however, did not completely abstain from manipulating the potent symbols of 
the canonical tradition. There are a few cases where it tried to find a place for itself in 
this tradition. The first such case was the rediscovery of the Wenshi zhenjing (fp iji 
If in 1233. This scripture authored by Yin Xi , Laozi’s disciple, had been lost for 
centuries. When it was found in a cache of documents and presented to the patriarch 
Yin Zhiping it was considered to be an omen of the new propagation of 

Taoism. The coincidence of the Yin name was reinforced by the fact that Yin’s master, 
Qiu Chuji, was himself widely considered, owing to his western travels, to be a new 
Laozi. The Wenshi zhenjing was not a real rediscovery, however, since the text (prob- 
ably a tenth-century apocryphal work) had actually been in circulation for some time 
already. 

A different kind of scriptural manipulation was the forging of ncwjing. Although 
this can never be proved definitely, it does seem that at least two (and probably more) 
“Lingbao scriptures,” the Datong jing and the Chiwen donggujing yfc jC M 

were written in Quanzhen circles. This authorship would explain why these two 
works almost always appear with commentaries by Quanzhen masters, and also why 
to this day they are included in almost all Quanzhen collections. Other possible cases 
include 646 Taishang laojun wai riyong miaojing and 2s Yuanshi tianzun shuo dedao li- 
aoshenjing. On the other hand, neither the Wenshi zhenjing nor the various “Quanzhen 
scriptures” ever commanded special authority among the adepts. 

The history of Quanzhen texts should be understood in the framework of the Quan- 
zhen organization, a monastic order based on a dense network of small monasteries 
and temples, supported by lay congregations ( hui # ). For instance, the 1309 reprint of 
i76Xuanfeng qinghui tu was due to fundraising organized by a number of lay members 
of Taoist associations spread from Hangzhou to Peking. We can therefore understand 
the existence of many “association members” ( huishou ) among the dedicatees of 
Quanzhen poetry. Most prefaces were written by lay believers who were not, properly 
speaking, Taoists, but whose deep faith and admiration went well beyond the polite 
deference of a scholar pen-friend. Du Dekang fitliljf, the sponsor of Yin Zhiping, is a 
telling example; Wang E EE I! (1190-1273), sponsor of Wang Zhijin and his disciple 
Ji Zhizhen, is another. These men were Confucians engaged in political careers; they 
were clearly not free to follow the ascetic path of celibacy and poverty of a Quanzhen 
monk but were nonetheless engaged, in a personal and not merely intellectual sense, 
in the Quanzhen movement. 

The complete reorganization of the Quanzhen after the fall of the Yuan entailed a 
loss of the best part of such support. Literary output dropped dramatically and never 
recovered the intensity of the thirteenth century. It is likely that many works were also 
lost around that time. The compilers of the Zhengtong canon, who held Quanzhen 
in high esteem, included all the scriptures they could find (possibly in the libraries of 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1133 ] 

large monasteries), but much more was lost. It is unlikely that the 1281 condemnation 
played a role in this, since Quanzhen writings were not especially targeted. The burn- 
ing of many temples during the Yuan-Ming transition is a more likely culprit. More- 
over, although Taoist-inclined literati enjoyed Quanzhen poetry, it never caught the 
fancy of mainstream literary criticism, which, with some reason, found it too forceful 
and ideological. The Quanzhen anthologies were therefore rarely to be found in large 
private libraries. Quanzhen poetry is rarely included in imperial anthologies of classical 
poetry; it has been rediscovered by literary historians only in recent decades. 

This picture is confirmed by two observations. First, very few Yuan and Ming edi- 
tions of Quanzhen works in the canon survive separately. We have only a Jin edition 
of iiS9 Panxi ji and Yuan editions of 1140 Yunshan ji and 1059 Panshan Qiyun Wang 
zhenren yulu, all in the Peking Library. The I0S9 Wang zhenren yulu is often quoted, 
has been included in several Ming collectanea ( congshu ), and commanded the respect 
of luminaries like Jiao Hong (1541-1620). Jiao’s attitude might be typical of the 
many scholars who, without considering the Quanzhen masters as first-class poets or 
essayists, were impressed by the depth of insight and spirituality conveyed by their 
words. The second observation concerns the fisting of Quanzhen works in the bib- 
liographic catalogues of the Ming and Qing. Thirty-six titles are mentioned, some of 
them since lost, belonging to all categories (see Goossaert, “La creation du taoisme 
moderne,” 436-38). The anthologies, however, are underrepresented: it is remarkable, 
for instance, that Wang Zhe’s works are completely absent from these catalogues. 
The most salient information is that hagiographic works account for almost half of the 
references. It seems that mainstream Chinese scholars chose to remember early Quan- 
zhen for its historical significance rather than for its contribution to Chinese thought 
and literature. It is also noteworthy that, of the five early Quanzhen works that have 
been transmitted outside the canon ( Xuanfeng qinghui tu, Laozi bashiyi hua tu, Qizhen 
xianzhuan, Quanzhen zongyan fangwai xuanyan, and Daodejing zhu by He Daoquan, 
all mentioned above), three are of a hagiographic nature. 

Quanzhen works mentioned in epigraphy, hagiographic texts, and quotations from 
Ming texts, as well as their prefaces in literary collections, resuscitate titles of books 
now lost. A comprehensive check provided a fist of eighty-one such tides. As far as we 
can tell from mere tides, these books seem to have been similar in format to those that 
are extant; mainly poetry, yulu, and a number of commentaries on the Taoist classics. 
This suggests that the selection of Quanzhen texts now extant, largely thanks to the 
Zhengtong canon, is representative of the larger production of early Quanzhen. 




[ ii34 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 

3.B.9.a Hagiography and Biography 

A large collection of hagiographic works, inside and outside the canon, is concerned 
with the Quanzhen movement. In the canon, the oldest text is 173 Jinlian zhengzong ji , 
composed by Qin Zhian Hi * $ (1188-1244), coeditor of the Taoist canon of the Jin, 
the Xuandu baozang £ UP H? l|!c of 1244, for inclusion in that collection. Then come 
three works by the greatest Quanzhen historiographer, Li Daoqian (1219-1296): a 
chronology (17s Qizhen nianpu), a collection of biographies (gss Zhongnan shun zuting 
xianzhen neizbuan), and an anthology of stele inscriptions (973 Ganshui xianyuan lu). 
From a later date are 174 Jinlian zhengzong xianyuan xiangzhuan, which probably 
aimed at the same public as 173 Jinlian zhengzong ji: both are breviaries of the origins 
and early history of the Quanzhen. Also written in the fourteenth century, 1069 Shang- 
yang zijindan dayao liexian zhi adopts the same format as the two works above: the 
Five Ancestors, wuzu (Laozi, Donghua dijun jj|!j§ Z hongli Quan, 
Lu Dongbin, and Liu Haichan; Wang Zhe may replace Laozi), and the Seven 
Zhenren; it also adds his own subbranch of the lineage. There existed further narra- 
tives about the Quanzhen patriarchs, as their celebrity made them public figures. For 
instance, one of the sources of 17s Qizhen nianpu is a book by the Jin literary figure 
turned Quanzhen monk Wang Cui JLW (d. 1243), a work later expanded into the 
Qizhen xianzhuan "bR flllfU, still extant in a 1417 edition. These narratives in turn 
inspired full-fledged novels called “stories of the Seven Zhenren,” of which several 
examples date from the Qing. Novelists were not the only ones interested in these 
tales. Playwrights also plumbed them. Ma Danyang was the hero of plays written at 
the end of the thirteenth century (see Hawkes, “Quanzhen plays”). A variety of works 
from the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries together provide as many as six different 
versions of the history of Wang Zhe and his seven apostles, not to mention some 
500 extant stone inscriptions. 

Although usually treated as a group, the early Quanzhen masters also have indi- 
vidual hagiographies in anecdotal style. S94 Tixuan zhenren xianyi lu is concerned with 
one of the Seven Zhenren, Wang Chuyi j£ lM ~ ; 305 Chunyang dijun shenhua miaotong 
ji is the standard hagiography of Lu Dongbin, as well as providing the framework 
of the murals of the Chunyang dian in the renowned Quanzhen monastery 

Yongle gong built on Lii’s presumed birthplace (Ang, “Le culte de Lii Dong- 
bin”). In the same monastery, the murals of the Chongyang dian devoted to 

Wang Zhe, are in a poor state and little studied, but they were certainly based on a 
similar hagiographic work. The murals can be identified with an illustrated biography 
of Wang, Chongyang zhenjun minhua tu , quoted in the still partially extant 1309 edition 
of Xuanfeng qinghui tu £MIS # HI (reprint Shanghai: Hanfen lou, 1925). This work 
by the Quanzhen monk Shi Zhijing Jj All (1202-1275) is an illustrated biography of 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 113 s ] 

Qiu Chuji. This beautifully edited work matches a full-page illustration with each 
anecdote. Shi Zhijing, a friend of Li Daoqian, also composed the Laojun bashiyi hua 

tu%M)\-\ -ft [SI , an illustrated narration of the various apparitions of Laozi on 

Earth, which elicited much furore from the Buddhists since it included the old huahu 
f k Sf] story. All of these works, whether written or pictorial, belong to the same genre, 
to which one can also add 170 Zitong dijun huashu. 

Most of these works appeared during the half century 1230—1280, when Quanzhen 
identity was being elaborated in a very competitive setting. In particular, Li Daoqian 
and Shi Zhijing were active around the time of the famous Buddho-Taoist contro- 
versies of the 1250s, and their works might very well be an answer to them, although 
they do not show any prejudice against other religions (see Miura Suichi, “Gendai 
shiso”). The 1429 Changchun zhenren xiyouji is also relevant to this problem. The lit- 
erary, artistic, and historiographic qualities of the Quanzhen accounts of this period 
contrast with the offensiveness of their detractors (cf. Rachewiltz, “The Hsi-yu luj 
and Kubo Noritada, “Prolegomena”). The Quanzhen compilers usually mention their 
sources and rarely take recourse to spurious evidence (the first four ancestors being an 
exception). All authors mainly rely on stele inscriptions. This underlines the role of lay 
patrons in fashioning Quanzhen’s identity, for most steles were written by scholars, 
even if they used the memoranda provided by the Quanzhen monks. 

Quanzhen lore is centred on lineages, not on places. The order nonetheless re- 
garded the Zhongnan shan [i| (Shaanxi) as its holy land, and it is in Quanzhen 
circles that 9S6 Zhongnan shan shuojing tai lidai zhenxian beiji (also available in rubbing) 
and 937 Gu Louguan ziyun yanqing ji were compiled, thus acknowledging the local 
traditions to which the Quanzhen movement was heir. 

Jinlian zhengzong ji ^ M IE ns 12 
5 juan 

By Qin Zhian hao Changchun hutian Linjian yuke 

g, Shuli daoren If il A; preface dated 1241 
173 (fasc. 75-76) 

“Record of the True Line of Transmission of the Golden Lotus School.” This scrip- 
ture has a preface by the author, dated 1241. In Henan, Qin Zhian joined Song De- 
fang. Both Taoists assumed responsibility for the edition of the Xuandu baozang A 
S? $c • Qin Zhian incorporated “The Time Line of Transmission” into this collection 
of Taoist literature (see Yuan Haowen JC PJ fnl , “Tongzhen zi mubei ming jj§ [H f ‘ A 
in Yishan xiansheng wenjing 31.314b— 315b). 

The ‘True Line of Transmission” comprises fourteen Taoist names. The respective 
biographies have been arranged according with the historical development of the lin- 
eage as understood by the author. The first patriarch of the Golden Lotus (Quanzhen) 



[ 1136 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 

school is Donghua dijun S (Wang Xuanfu ZESffi), who was initiated into 

the Taoist order by the deity Boyun shangzhen S ff _h R • Donghua dijun passed his 
knowledge to Zhongli Quan. The biographies of Lu Yan andLiu Haichan fol- 
low. These two Taoists were also spiritual ancestors of the Quanzhen school. Then the 
text gives the biographies of Wang Chongyang and his two friends from Shaanxi, 
He Yuchan and Li Lingyang preceding the presentation of the Seven 

Zhenren (Qizhen -fc lR ), who are connected with Wang Chongyang’s activities in 
Shandong. The two friends from Shaanxi constitute a link with the village of Liujiang 
(see 9 ss Zhongnan shan zuting xianzhen neizhuan i.ia-4a). Wang Chongyang is 
featured as a successor to Lin Lingsu. However, Wang Chongyang’s specialty 
was Taoist teachings dealing with human nature and existence ( xinpyming ft an ). 

The biographies contain a descriptive text and one or several eulogies. They also 
mention the honors that had been bestowed on these Taoists by emperors of the 
Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) and Yuan (1279-1368) dynasties. Finally they list the literary 
works written by these masters. Each biography concludes with a mediumistic poem. 
The “The Time Line of Transmission” aims to legitimize the Quanzhen school in the 
first half of the thirteenth century. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Jinlian zhengzony) xianyuan xianjzhuan jfe S IE m fill M M 

45 fols. 

Compiled by Liu Zhixuan £ , hew Lushan qingxi daoren IH£ LU ’/ft M M A , 

and Xie Xichan §8f 0 fit ; preface dated 1326 

174 (fasc. 76) 

“Portraits and Biographies Concerning the Origin of the Masters of the True Line 
of Transmission of the Golden Lotus [School].” Two prefaces introduce this work. 
The first was written by the Thirty-ninth Heavenly Master, Zhang Sicheng 
htw Taixuan zi ^ -p , and is dated 1327. The second preface is by Liu Zhixuan and is 
dated 1326. This work, like 173 Jinlian zhengzong ji, deals with the history of the Quan- 
zhen school. 

The short biographies, each of which is preceded by a portrait of its subject (figs. 
59-61), also indicate the literary works of the master. Reference is made to the temples 
or cloisters, which were founded after the death of the respective master in places 
where he had lived, taught, and finally died. At the end of each text, the honorary 
titles decreed by the court of the Yuan dynasty (1279-1368) are listed. A short eulogy 
concludes the text of each biography. An independent collection of historical docu- 
ments precedes the portraits and biographies. This collection was printed in 1324. The 
documents comprise Genghis Khan’s statements inviting Qiu Chuji, the decree 
bestowing honorary titles on the founders of the Quanzhen school, issued in 1269 by 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1137 ] 




figure 59. Portrait of figure 60 . Wang Zhe, the figure 61. Qiu Chuji, 

the immortal Lu Dongbin founder of the Quanzhen Taoist ambassador to 

{I74 I5 b) order ( 174 18a) Genghis Khan (174 3^) 



Kublai, and finally four similar documents issued in 1310 by Wuzong. All these docu- 
ments had been copied by Liu Zhixuan when he was serving the Quanzhen master 
Sun Deyu (1243-1321) at the Changchun temple in the capital. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Qizhen nianpu iff 

22 fols. 

Compiled by Li Daoqian 1271 

175 (fasc. 76) 

“Chronological Biographies of the Seven Zhenren. Li Daoqian is said to have 
compiled these biographies in the Ancestral Hall at Liujiang village, Shaanxi. This was 
the western center of the Quanzhen school. The Seven Zhenren are the seven masters 
of the first generation, the followers of Wang Zhe (Chongyang). At the beginning 
of the text, biographical data concerning Wang Zhe are given. They are taken from 
a biography written by Wang Cui 3 Ef?. The chronology covers the period between 
the birth of the historical founder of the school, Wang Zhe (1112), and the death of 
Qiu Chuji (1227). Qiu Chuji (Changchun) was the last of the Seven Zhenren to 
die. The chronology compiles the most remarkable events and data referring to the 
Qizhen’s contacts with Wang Zhe and their careers as Quanzhen Taoists. 

The biographies attempt to reconcile some contradictory information, which could 
have been drawn from older (not specified) biographies. Li Daoqian bases his correc- 




[ 1138 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



tions on the literary collections of the Seven Zhenren, which are treated as authentic 
and reliable documents. The text also points to some other works by Quanzhen Tao- 
ists that are said to be reliable. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Xuanfeng qinghui lu £ 

9 fols. 

By Yila Chucai ifilj @ fy ; preface 1232 
176 (fasc. 76) 

“Record of the Celebrated Encounter with Taoism.” This account was in fact writ- 
ten by Yelu Chucai . Yila Chucai is a distortion of that name. The anony- 

mous preface is dated 1232. It speaks about the visit of the Quanzhen patriarch and 
preceptor of state, Qiu Chuji, to the temporary residence of the Khan. The preface 
compares this event with the famous journey to the West that Laozi is said to have 

undertaken. It is stated that the “Celebrated Encounter” had been written at the behest 
of the Khan. 

The text records the encounters between Qiu Chuji and Genghis Khan in 1222. 
It features the Taoist’s answers to the Khan in response to his request for medicine to 
prolong his life. Qiu Chuji expounds his philosophy and discusses the conditions 
that shape a human life. He pays special attention to the conditions of the ruler. There 
is an intimate relationship between the external affairs of state and the human quali- 
ties of a ruler. The Khan is advised to restrain his old habits. Qiu Chuji points to 
the pacifying effects of the Way, which the teachings and deeds ofTaoists (Zhengyi 
and Quanzhen) had brought to China. He also suggests imitating the example of the 
Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) rulers, who had employed Liu Yu MM to enforce Chinese 
ways of government. The most interesting parts of the “Celebrated Encounter” are 
translated in Waley, The travels of an alchemist , 21-25. 

bibliography 

Zhang Zheng, “ Genfu keikai roku wo megutte.” 

Florian C. Reiter 

Chunyang dijun shenhua miaotong ji M P§ ?j? f! it jl $2 

By Miao Shanshi [SfUthf (fl. 1324) 

7 juan 

305 (fasc. 159) 

‘Records of the Miraculous Manifestation of the Transcendence of the Imperial 
Lord Pure Yang.” Chunyang dijun is the official tide Lu Yan received in 1310 by de- 
cree of the emperor Wuzong. The author of this account, a native of Nanking, was a 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1139 ] 



disciple of Li Daochun (see 1060 Qing’an Tingchan ziyulu 3) and the editor of 6s 1 
Taishang dongshen sanyuan miaoben fushou zhenjing (postface dated 1324). 

According to the preface, the records consisted of 120 tales of miraculous manifes- 
tations (hud) in six juan. The present edition only reaches the hua 108. The episodes 
20-24 and 26-33 are missing; the remaining hua number ninety-five and are arranged 
in seven juan. They trace the life of the saint, from his birth in 790 at Yongle (Hezhong 
fu, Shanxi) to his death at the end of the Tang ( hua 1 to 8). Next in the narrative come 
the many post-mortem appearances of the saints, continuing into the late thirteenth 
century. Many of these tales feature anecdotes known through later compilations (see 
1484 Liizu zhi) as well as Yuan (12751-1368) and Ming (1368-1644) plays and vernacular 
literature. The author adds his comments to the tales, either as a “judgment” ( tuan 

) or as a poem ( shi gvf). The first hua are all followed by tuan, whereas later hua 
are mostly followed by poems. Comments on the last stories (after number 101) are 
missing. 

The author freely declares his views through the comments. He represents the 
texts of 1191 Bichuan Zhengyang zhenren lingbao bifa and of Zhong-Lii chuandao ji (in 
263 Xiuzhen shishu juani4-is) as forgeries. On the other hand, the saint is said to have 
received 19 Taisjang shengxuan xiaozai burning miaojing, a holy book collecting the 
essence of the Three Teachings, during his initiation (2.5b). At the beginning of the 
present work, the author reproduces two imperial decrees canonizing the Five Patri- 
archs of Quanzhen, Lu Yan being one of them. These decrees, dated 1269 and 1310, 
also feature in 174 Jinlian zhengzong xianyuan xiangzhuan. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ang, “Le culte de Lii Dongbin”; Mori Yuria, “Junyo teikun shinka myotsu. kt” 

Kwong Fling Foon 

Tixuan zhenren xianyi /wflaARAISiMi® 

15 fols. 

Thirteenth century 

594 (fasc. 329) 

“Report on the Wondrous Events [in the Life of] the Adept who is United with the 
Mystery.” This account concerns the Quanzhen patriarch Wang Chuyi HH - • (first 
generation of the Seven Zhenren), on whom Emperor Zhangzong in 1198 bestowed 
the title of Tixuan dashi fS^ ASP - This work was compiled by his followers. It con- 
tains nineteen accounts of the wondrous deeds of the patriarch. Wang Chuyi appears 
to have effected the miracles in order to convert people. 

In 1287, Yao Sui $ti Jii based his inscription “Yuyang tixuan guangdu zhenren Wang 
zongshi daoxing beiming A/jS® tXA£^fWMf7f$$S "m^z? Ganshui xian- 



1 



[ H40 ] 3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order 

ymn lu 2.13a, on this work. The expanded honorary title of the Taoist, which was used 
in the tide of Yao Sui’s inscription, had been conferred on Wang Chuyi in 1269 by 
Emperor Shizu. It is possible that the present text already existed before 1269. 

Wang Chuyi is featured as a Taoist priest and healer who was well versed in magi- 
cal methods. No mention is made of his affiliation with the Quanzhen school. This 
work describes events that are reported in part in ns2 Tunguang ji, such as the magic 
that Wang performed in order to procure rain in Peking in 1209 (4a-4b). The present 
work provides important information about the way of life of this Taoist who traveled 
widely in Shandong and Hebei, not having the habit of staying long in one place. This 
work and us2 Tunguang ji complement one another. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Mori Yuria, “Taigen shinjin ken’irokuV 

Florian C. Reiter 

Zhongnan shan zuting xianzhen neizhuan iL ffllg fill R 1*1 fl? 

3 juan 

By Li Daoqian ; preface by Wang Daoming dated 1284 

955 (fasc. 605) 

“Biographies of the Immortal Zhenren of the Ancestral Hall at Mount Zhongnan.” 
These biographies describe the activities of Quanzhen Taoists of the first, second, and 
third generations. The Ancestral Hall (Liujiang village, Shaanxi) was around the end 
of the thirteenth century a major center of the Quanzhen school (compare 17s Qizhen 
nianpu 5 b— 9b). The author of the preface, Wang Daoming, was in charge of the Yuxian 
gong jiflllHf temple in Ganhe zhen (Zhongnan). 

The immortals and zhenren in question were the friends and followers of Wang 
Chongyang, Ma Danyang, Qiu Chuji, and other patriarchs of the Quanzhen 
school, who had lived for some time in the Ancestral Hall. The biographies feature 
the affiliations of these Taoists. They show clearly how the Quanzhen school increas- 
ln g>y gained influence in society. The biographies fist their subjects’ literary works 
and sometimes officially decreed posthumous titles. Numerous biographies concern 
persons for whom no inscriptions had been written. This work preserves important 
supplements to the collection of inscriptions later compiled by the same author (see 
973 Ganshui xianyuan lu). 

Florian C. Reiter 



3 .B. 9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1141 ] 

Ganshui xianyuan lu ff 7k fill £$ 

10 juan 

By Li Daoqian , hao Hefu f[] iff ; postface by Zhang Haogu 'JMfcf’iS; 1289 

973 (fasc. 611-613) 

“Record of the Immortals from the Sweet Water [River].”This collection of inscrip- 
tions concerns the history of the Quanzhen school. The Sweet Water River (Ganhe) 
flows through Ganhe county in Shaanxi where Wang Chongyang (1112-1170) met 
with zhenren and received Taoist instructions. The immortals constitute the historical 
and orthodox line of transmission in the Quanzhen school, from the first to the third 
generation. Li Daoqian hailed from Kaifeng. In 1281 he was the abbot of the Chong- 
yang wanshou gong temple (Liujiang village, Shaanxi). Li Daoqian, who is also the 
author of 17s Qizhen nianpu and 9 SS Zhongnan shan zuting xianzhen neizhuan , was a 
student and follower of Yu Dongzhen ^PR (1166-1250). He was a major author 
and compiler of the history of the Quanzhen school. His student Zhang Haogu says 
in his postface (io.32a-33a) that Li collated all texts of this collection. 

Li Daoqian places at the very beginning of this work the edict of Emperor Shizu 
(1269), which decrees religious titles for die spiritual ancestors of the Quanzhen 
school and for Wang Chongyang and his seven followers. The compilation of 
inscriptions that follow this edict deal widi life within the Quanzhen order and with 
Quanzhen temples. This work also contains official and scholarly poems that refer to 
Quanzhen Taoists. 

Some inscriptions were composed by well-known literati like Yuan Haowen jctfr 
fnj (1190-1257), Yao Sui (1238-1313), and Wang Ell (1190-1273). There are sev- 

eral different types of texts: tomb inscriptions, steles, and biographies. Comparisons 
with other editions show that Li Taoqian did not always transcribe his texts accurately 
and completely. However, most of the inscriptions in this edition cannot be found 
elsewhere; for this reason, the compilation remains the most important source for the 
history of the Quanzhen school. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Changchun zhenren xiyou ji # R A ffi M 12 

2 juan 

By Li Zhichang ^ Jc3^,hao Zhenchang zi R^-p; preface by Sun Xi MM 

dated 1228 

1429 (fasc. 1056) 

“Report on the Journey of the Adept Changchun to the West.” This account was 
written by the Quanzhen Taoist Li Zhichang, who accompanied the leader of the 
school, Qiu Chuji, on his journey in 1221-1224 from Peking via Central Asia to the 
temporary residence of Genghis Khan near Kabul. 




[ H42 ] 3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order 



3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1143 ] 



The present text describes the travelers, itinerary, and people the two zhenren met 
along the way. The author observes the activities of the patriarch, who had numerous 
contacts with local officials and participated in religious festivities. There is only scant 
information about the discussions with the Khan (on that subject, see 176 Xuanfeng 
qinghui lu). This work also covers the period between Qiu Chuji’s return to Peking 
and his dcadi in 1227. It includes information about the arrangements for nominating 
a successor in the leadership of the Quanzhen school (Yin Qinghe ^ fit IP). The ap- 
pendix (2.27b-32a) contains seven documents. Most of these had been sent either by 
the Khan or the administration of Peking concerning Qiu Chuji. Large portions of 
this report are translated by A. Waley (The travels of an alchemist). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Waley, The travels of an alchemist; Zhang Zheng, “Choshun shinjin saiyuki ni tsuite.” 

Florian C. Reiter 

3.B.9.b Logia and Collected Works 

Many Quanzhen masters had their own literary anthology, usually composed only 
of shi [Kf- and ci gn] -poems, and various songs. Besides individual anthologies, selected 
collective anthologies of Quanzhen poetry were compiled to help spread the gospel of 
Quanzhen predication. Although it is not limited to Quanzhen authors, 1100 Minghe 
yuyin contributed to the diffusion of Quanzhen poetry. A Quanzhen monk edited 
the authoritative collection of Lu Dongbin’s poetry, ioss Chunyang zhenren hun- 
chengji. 

The prevalence of poetry in Quanzhen literature seems quite natural; poetry was 
a part of the curriculum in Quanzhen schools. Quanzhen poems range between the 
didactic and lyric styles. The variety of subjects is matched by the variety of styles. Un- 
like the clearly structured poetical works of southern neidan, Quanzhen poetry is ex- 
perimental. For instance, verses exchanged between Wang Zhe and Ma Danyang 
leave the first character of a verse for the recipient of the poem to guess ( cangtou MM)- 
Ma Danyang also offers verse experiments in the repetitive style. The most common 
mode is the ci and, more generally, poetry to be sung. Beside their use as “cases for 
reflection” (gongan &*), these songs were also chanted during meditation or ritual 
and more generally on collective occasions. The Quanzhen rules specify, “During the 
hai hour [9 to 11 p . m .] we sing and chant, read religious discourses, lyric and regular 
poetry to dispel the temptations of sleep” (123s Quanzhen qinggui 6a.). 

Why did Quanzhen masters prefer to communicate through poetry? Quite simply, 
their poetry appealed to the emotions; its aim was to convert as much as to explain. It 
was intended to induce a religious experience that would cause one to “enter the Tao ” 



not to understand it. Quanzhen was a missionary institution, and poetry its language 
of conversion. A large number of Quanzhen poems were composed upon solicitation 
by an adept, or given to prospective adepts with a performative intent. Many verses 
begin with words such as “I enjoin you to . . . (quan jun $)]-[})■ In order to increase 
their audience, poems were engraved on stone in temples. This is why hagiographic 
accounts, when quoting a book, always insist on its being “spread in the world” 
(xing yushi the very opposite of an esoteric book. The performative aspect 

of Quanzhen poetry is borne out by its finks with Yuan theater ( zaju MM ), which is 
replete with “Taoist aspirations” ( daoqing iM fit ) lyrics and allusions to the cult of the 
immortals. The canon contains a set of daoqing songs, 1144 Ziranji, that might have 
been sung during festivals at Quanzhen temples and monasteries, possibly to accom- 
pany the fife stories of the immortals and Quanzhen saints, not unlike the Buddhist 
bianwen H 

Just as Quanzhen poetry was anthologized, its yulu (sayings) were also edited 
in “selections,” such as 1236 Zhenxian zhizbi yulu. The most remarkable examples of 
Quanzhen logia, however, are four longer independent works: ios 7 Danyang zhenren 
yulu , 13 jo Qinghe zhenren beiyou yulu , ios9 Panshan Qiyun Wang zhenren yulu, and 1076 
Suiji yinghua lu. Many more Quanzhen yulu were compiled during the Ming and 
Qing periods, some of which are in the present corpus, but few match the mission- 
ary spirit of these four works. The prevalence of colloquial baihua now make them 
difficult to read, but their humor (sometimes in the tradition of Linji Chan) and the 
predominance of autobiographical narratives contribute to their appeal. They exhibit 
a pedagogy based on imitation of the fives of the saints and collective emulation of 
asceticism, in a exalted atmosphere. The continued relevance of these older yulu is 
documented by their edition by a Quanzhen monk at the beginning of the twentieth 
century (see Liezhen yulu jiyao JflJ |Jt fip £8 tM 1 ? , Daozang jinghua, ser. 3, vol. 8) and by 
excerpts posted in monasteries today. 

Tunguangji St )ft 

4 juan 

By Wang Chuyi j£)H— ; between 1213-1217 

1152 (fasc. 792) 

“Radiance of the Clouds.” This literary collection presents lyrical works of various 
genres. Originally the collection had a preface by the author, now lost (see 17s Qizhen 
nianpu 4a). There is a reference to the death of Hao Datong (1213). Wang Chuyi 
died in 1217. These dates suggest that the collection was compiled between 1213 and 
1217. Radiance of the Clouds is the name of a cave in Wendeng (Shandong), 
where Wang Chuyi was living when he joined Wang Chongyang in 1168. 



[ H44 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1145 ] 






The collection contains dedications written for friends and acquaintances, instruc- 
tions for students or disciples (see, e.g., 4.28a-28b), and also many texts that deal 
with specific events in the life of the author. Wang Chuyi, who had received attention 
from the imperial court, was a renowned Taoist priest and practitioner of exorcistic 
and liturgical services. His activities, which were commented upon by himself and 
eventually by his followers, connect this work with S 94 Tixuan zhenren xianyi lu. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Jin zhenren yulu W R A utl $$ 

14 fols. 

Thirteenth century 

1056 (fasc. 728) 

“Recorded Discourses by the Zhenren Jin.” This work comprises five extended sec- 
tions of quite different texts. Only the first part (ia-4b) corresponds to the tide and 
contains discourses concerning physiological and meditative self-cultivation. These 
discourses have been attributed to Jin Daocheng # (cf., e.g., “Chongzhen pian 

7 k tR H in 1017 Daoshu i9-3b-4b). Considering the many quotations of “Adept Jin” 
in early Quanzhen materials, like iis 3 Chongyang quanzhen ji 10.21a, this part of the 
work suggests that at an early stage some concepts of the Song (960-1279) neidan 
school had made their way into Quanzhen teachings. However, the true au- 
thor or compiler of the five sections of this work is unknown. The four subsequent 
texts indicate that this work could not have been compiled before the thirteenth 
century. 

The work includes, in addition, the following texts: “Chongyang zushi xiuxian liao- 
xing bijue 7 which deals with the way of life recommended 

by Wang Chongyang (4b-6b); “Da Ma shifu shisi wen con- 

taining definitions of terms and concepts by Ma Danyang (6b-8b); and “Xuanmen 
zabao shiba wenda f 36 ! ffl Sf A A foliar,” with poems concerning basic concepts of 
the Quanzhen school (8b-iib), for example, “to leave the family behind and practice 
self-cultivation.” At the end of the work, Quanzhen themes are again addressed in the 
form of odes (nb-i4b). 

Florian C. Reiter 

Danyang zhenren yulu f] iK A IS 

16 fols. 

By Wang Yizhong j£ [§f cfa , hao Lingyin zi if 111 f ; twelfth century 

1057 (fasc. 728) 

“Recorded Discourses of the Adept Danyang.” These discourses contain statements 
made by Ma Danyang along with accounts of his lectures, which were compiled 



after his death in 1183 by his follower Wang Yizhong (4b). This work illustrates how 
Ma Danyang’s way of life was in harmony with his teachings. 

Wang Yizhong starts his compilation with a short account of his first contacts with 
Ma Danyang in 1183 in Shandong. He presents precepts for living in accordance 
with the Quanzhen teachings, as expressed by Ma Danyang. “Purity and Tranquil- 
ity” the absence of any distractions by the profane world, is more important than 
progress achieved by reading and studying books (10a). As evidence for the claim that 
the “elixir emerges by itself, and the immortal becomes immortal of himself]” this text 
introduces Liu Gaoshang -§1 |nj fp) (ft. 1100; 8b; cf. 781 Xuanpin lu 5.22a-22b). Many 
statements made in this text can be found, with variants, in related texts (see, e.g., 1234 
Danyang zhenren zhiyan ib [14b, “The Tao of Heaven”]). Some parallels are found in 
12S6 Zhenxian zhizhi yulu i.ia-9b. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Wuwei qingjing Changsheng zhenren zhizhen yulu 

® Mifflin RAM II 

35 fols. 

By Liu Chuxuan preface dated 1202 

1058 (fasc. 728) 

“Record of the Most True Words [of Liu Chuxuan].” This is a well structured 
series of eighty didactic expositions about theories and concepts pertaining to the 
Quanzhen teachings of the Taoist Liu Chuxuan, one of the Seven Zhenren (Qi- 
zhen A R )■ The systematically arranged expositions present definitions of terms or 
concepts in the form of replies to the questions of a fictitious interrogator. The text 
is preceded by an index of the eighty terms or concepts. They are arranged in sets of 
two complementary items. Han Shiqian (zi Yanguang iBlM) was asked by 

Liu Chuxuan to write the preface (dated 1202). Han Shiqian called himself “Tao- 
ist Xubo, from the city of Duan in Huozhe [Shanxi]” Huozhe Duancheng Shuangxi 
Xubo daoren (S '/? /it 6 il A ■ Han Shiqian had received the text of the 

“Most True Words” through the intermediary of two disciples of Liu Chuxuan 
who also transmitted the request for a preface. Han Shiqian points in particular to the 
literary activities of Liu Chuxuan. He emphasizes that this work was based on the 
explanations provided by the Huang-Lao M school, and that it presents the knowl- 
edge of life and death. It also shows, he says, the way of leaving behind the “ocean of 
misery.” 

bibliography 

Reiter, “The blending of religious convictions,” 454-58. 

Florian C. Reiter 



[ ii46 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 

Qing’an Yingchan zi yulu jjf H t S In H 

6 juan 

By Chai Yuangao TC ffs , zi Heian ® $£, hew Guangchan zi Iff !l@ -f , and others; 

preface dated 1288 

1060 (fasc. 729) 

“Sayings of Master Yingchan.” This collection contains the teachings of Li Dao- 
chun (d. 1306), compiled by his main disciples, each of whom edited one juan. They 
are, in addition to Chai Yuangao, a Maoshan Taoist who also signed the preface, 
Zhao Daoke lijjf hi, zi Dingan Miao Shanshi zi Shian ft Jig; Deng 

Decheng zi Ning’an Zhang Yingtan IJSfSfl, zi Meng’an Cai 

Zhiyi HiSEOi, zi Sim’an There is a colophon by Wang Jie, who printed the 
text, after having obtained the manuscript from Cai Zhiyi. 

According to the preface of io 6 sXuanjiao dagongan (ib), Li Daochun, native of 
Duliang in Hunan province, was the disciple of Wang Jinchan life £ff, who in 
turn was a pupil of Bo Yuchan. Li’s teaching is considered to be a synthesis between 
the Northern school (i.e., the Quanzhen order) and the Southern school (Nanzong 
!$*?)• Himself a southerner, he must have lived for a time at the Changsheng guan 
ifi'fe® temple in Henan province (see Gujin tushujicheng 396, “Lixing bu” fefe^uE)- 
According the preface of the present work, Li stayed for a period on Maoshan. It was, 
however, at Nanking, in the Zhonghe jingshe ffe, that his teaching took place 

(see 249 Zhonghe ji 4.11a). 

Li Daochun’s logia concern a variety of subjects: Chan Buddhism, Inner 
Alchemy, explanations on the Daode jing, and so forth. Juan 2, especially, concerns 
the eighty-one chapters of the Daodejing, which the master quotes in “case” fashion 
( gongan {Ik HI ) ; these explanations are called “the spiritual understanding of the Daode 
jing .” Additional explanations were provided when Li Daochun transmitted the 699 
Daode huiyuan to Zhao Daoke, a passage of which is quoted here. 

The last juan contains a series of twenty-five poems on alchemical themes, with the 
tide “Essentials of Alchemy” (“Jindan biyao feEJJifeil”; 6.i4b-i8b). The introduction 
refers to thirty-five themes, but this must be an error. At the end of this juan, there is 
an annotated hymn in praise of the Three Teachings. 

Catherine Despeux 

Panshan Qiyun Wang zhenren yulu iti If? ft I lit A IS f# 

44 fols. 

Compiled by Lun Zhihuan Ira preface dated 1247 

1059 (fasc. 728) 

“Record of the Discourses by the Adept Wang Qiyun from Mount Pan.” This tide 
contains reminiscences and instructions concerning the teaching activities of the Quan- 



3 . B .9 The Quanzhen Order [1/47] 



zhen Taoist Wang Qiyun. Wang was active as lecturer and preacher between the 
years 1219 and 1227 at Mount Pan §§ |JL| in Shaanxi, the period this work focuses upon. 
The preface (dated 1247) was written by Lun Zhihuan, a disciple of Wang Qiyun. 
Lun calls this work a “compass” for the beginner in Taoist studies. The work, he says, 
is based on materials collected by Mr. Liu , who had served as Wang’s companion 
for a considerable period of time. 

By means of Wang’s replies to questions about the religious life and its specific 
demands, the work presents practical instructions that appear to be typical of the 
Quanzhen school (e.g., see i6a-i7a, “the ascetic self-cultivation”). Certain statements 
by Wang Qiyun about the words or deeds of Ma Danyang and Qiu Chuji 
clearly link this work (and Wang himself) directly to the generation of the founders 
of the Quanzhen school (20a, 22a). 

This work has been incorporated, with many abridgments and variants, into 263.S3 
Xiuzhen shishu ia-4ib. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Panshan yulu S ill 13 U 

41 fols. 

263.53 Xiuzhen shishu 53 (fasc. 130) 

“Record of the Discourses from Mount Pan.” This is a different arrangement of the 
sayings of Wang Qiyun (1178-1263), the Quanzhen master from Mount Pan (cf. 1039 
Panshan Qiyun Wang zhenren yulu). 

Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 

Dongyuan ji rMH 

5 juan 

By Changquan zi (fl. 1231) 

1064 (fasc. 732 - 733 ) 

“Collected Works of the Abyssal Cavern.” This collection is signed by Master Fish 
Trap, from Guishan H|JL| (Shandong). The identity of the author concealed behind 
this peculiar penname is unknown. In the present work (4.1a), he declares that in 1231 
he fled the war with the Mongols and settled as a recluse in the district of Biyang |I§ 
(Henan). To judge from his writings, he must have been a scholar who sought refuge 
in Quanzhen Taoism during the great upheavals of that period. Other works signed 
by him in the Daozang are 101 Taishang shengxuan xiaozai hunting micwjing zhu and 
106 Taishang chiwen donggu jing zhu. They do not yield any additional information as 
to his identity. 

Juan 1 and 2 contain the first and second parts of a philosophical and mystical 
treatise entitled “Zhiyi shu M — U,” comprising seventy-two short chapters. Juan 3 



[ H48 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



contains thirty poems (plus an additional one) written under the inspiration of the 
thirty famous poems by Liu Xiyue fp S , alias Langran zi -p (see 271 Taixuan 

langran zi jindao shi). These poems were very popular in Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) 
times. 

The remainder of the contents are either rhapsodies ( wenfu or songs (ci §§]). 

Some are inspired by the author’s religious career, such as the piece in commemo- 
ration of his religious training as a Quanzhen monk at the Changchun guan 
H temple in Tangzhou f 0 Shanxi (“Tangzhou Changchun guan jinlian hui 
4.na-i2a) or of his preaching to the multitude (“Shengtang shizong 
4-9a-iob). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Daochan ji Jit If |j| 

9 fols. 

By Wang Zhitan JE * JB , zi Gongping {A ^ , hew Chunhe zhenren {f- f P (ft A 

(1200-1272) 

1073 (fasc. 739) 

“Collected Works on the Tao and Chan.” The author of this collection was the 
successor of Zhang Chengming at the Changchun gong temple in 

Peking. He was promoted by Empress Regent Nimacar (Naimazhen) to fifth patriarch 
of the Quanzhen order and for six years lived at the imperial palace (see 973 Ganshui 
xianyuan lu 7.ia-5b). Among his actions, it is recorded that he distributed to the entire 
court copies of the Illustrated Eighty-one Transformations ofLaozi ( Bashiyi hua tu /\~t* 
- -ft[S| ), published by Li Zhichang (sec Bianwei lu 3.768a). 

The present work consists of an introduction and seventy-three poems (instead of 
the seventy-four announced in the title on page 2b). The poetry takes as its subject 
Chan Buddhist themes, such as the taming of the buffalo (poems 22, 32, and 38), al- 
though there are also references to Inner Alchemy (22, 13, 47, 60) and to the Quanzhen 
order (j, 27, 41, +7)- 

Catherine Despeux 

Huanzhen ji )§ Ofj JJ| 

3 juan 

By Wan g Ji e 3 E 3 ft , zi Daoyuan if $j| , had Hunran zi (lift JP; preface by the 

Forty-third Heavenly Master, Zhang Yuchu dated 1392. 

1074 (fasc. 739) 

“Collected Works on the Return to the True.” Wang Jie, the author of this col- 
lection, was acquainted with the disciples of Li Daochun (see his colophon to 1060 
Qing’an Tingchan zi yulu ). Heavenly Master Zhang Yuchu states in his preface that 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1149 ] 



Wang came from the region of Nanchang 
Q f^J H (Jiangxi). Zhang obtained the manu- 

T. O script from his disciple Yuan Wenyi PC 

ill, who brought it back from a visit to the 
f Wu region in the spring of 1392. 

Juan 1 is devoted to Inner Alchemy and 
^ expounds the three stages in which the im- 

3fp ^ mortal embryo is formed and nourished so 

W /&. jlt> J3| Jr. aS t0 * 3ecome theyangshen |f§ ft . The text is 

3^ illustrated by diagrams. At the end of this 

juan, there are lists of the different terms 
^ ^ used for the cauldron, the elixir, and the fire 

phases of this process. (See fig. 62.) 

figure 62. Mind and Mystery, as the „. , 

. , \ , ’ The next two juan contain songs and 

foundations of the alchemical process ( 1074 

1.1a). Ming reprint of .598. Courtesy of the P° emS ° ften dedicated to disciples. Each 

Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois * s concerned with a particular alchemical 

9546/1060) issue. A short treatise on dreams ( mengshuo 

) is found in 2.8a-9a, and a longer one 
on fundamental nature (. xingshuo ft M ) in 2.9a-iob. A poem entitled “Hunran ge M 
it);” describes the author’s delight in meditation (2.i4b-i5b). A liturgical “Buxu ci Ip 
gBj ” in five stanzas seems to have been written for ritual performance in the author’s 
temple (2.i8b-i9a). 

Catherine Despeux 



figure 62. Mind and Mystery, as the 
foundations of the alchemical process ( 1074 
1.1a). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the 
Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 
9546/1060) 



Daoxuan pian 
15 fols. 

By Wang Jie j£f f\,zi Daoyuan JI tffl,hao Hunran zi ?Hft-p; fourteenth 

century 

1075 (fasc. 740) 

“Volume on the Tao and Its Mystery.” This volume is a collection of fifty-five poems 
on Taoist and Confiician themes, such as the Great Way ( dadao PcjM), die Mysterious 
Ultimate ( xuanji £j«g), rites and music (liyue |H^), and the Doctrine of the Mean 
(zhongyong ft jfjf ). On the author, see 1074 Huanzhen ji. 



Catherine Despeux 




[ i iso J 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 

Suiji yinghua lu 

2 juan 

By He Daoquan { 5 JiM A:, hao Wugou zi MHa A (d. 1399); edited by Jia Daoxuan 

M jM A ; preface by Lingtong zi MSA dated 1401 

1076 (fasc. 740) 

“Record of Conversions Made according to Circumstances.” This is a collection of 
logia of the early Ming Quanzhen master He Daoquan, consisting of dialogues and 
poems recorded during his numerous travels. 

He Daoquan, alias Songxi daoren A, was born in Qiantang Hi® (Hang- 

zhou). He later traveled through Jiangsu and Henan, and most of the pieces in this 
collection are set in these two provinces. In 1386 he sojourned at the Temple of the 
Eastern Peak (Dongyue miao A l|fj ) at Huayang lj! in Jiangsu (1.16b). A few days 

later, on the fifteenth day of the ninth month, he conducted the traditional Quanzhen 
Retreat of the Alms-Bowl Clepsydra ( zuobo at the Danyang Wanshou gong 

I §§ lilt It? temple in Chang’an HA (i.i6b-i7a). Two years later, in 1388, he was at the 
temple called Wangxiang tai (“The tower for Gazing Homeward,” one of the 

places in the Inferno, and thus linked to a Temple of the Eastern Peak in the “valley 
of Huayang”). There he entered into a Retreat of one hundred days (2.9a). It is not 
known at what time he retired to the Guifeng on Mount Zhongnan (Shaanxi), 
where he “accomplished the Tao.” A stele was erected to commemorate the event 
(preface, ia). He died in 1399 in an infirmary at Chang’an (preface, ia). Two years later, 
his grandson, a daoshi named Shoutong zi H? jl A , asked the author of the preface to 
publish the teachings of He, edited by his disciple Jia Daoxuan. 

The topics of these logia are very general. Only in one instance is Inner Alchemy 
discussed. The answers given by He Daoquan are strongly influenced by Chan Bud- 
dhism. A third of his partners are Buddhists. He quotes the great classics of Buddhism 
and of Quanzhen Taoism, as well as Li Daochun. 

Catherine Despeux 

Minghe yuyin 

9 juan 

Edited by Peng Zhizhong A 1 in 1347; preface by Yu Ji iMM. (1272-1348) 

1100 (fasc. 744-745) 

“Echoes of the Call of Cranes.” This is a collection of the poetry of major Taoist 
figures of the Song (960-1279). It contains approximately 500 items, for the most part 
ci-m lyrics, written to more than 150 tunes, by forty different authors. 

According to Yu Ji’s preface, the Taoist master Feng from Guiji composed 
twenty ti-poems to the well-known time “Su Wu man on the study of the 

Tao and the cultivation of immortality (see 2.ia-8b). Encouraged by a friend named 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ iisi ] 



Fei Wuyin Jfltt SI, Yu Ji composed eleven poems to the same tune (2.8b-i3a), mostly 
during the years 1343 and 1344. Three years later, in 1347, Peng Zhizhong, a Taoist from 
Mount Xianyou fill-in the Huagai range in Zhejiang (see 778 Huagai shtm Fuqiu 
Wang Guo san zhenjun shishi 6.i2b-i3a), joined these poems to his anthology of Taoist 
poetry and had the entire collection printed. 

The collection is composed for the most part of works by the Quanzhen patriarchs, 
although there are also poems by Taoists from other schools, such as Bo Yuchan 
(3.7a-na). Some of the poems of the Quanzhen patriarchs have been separately 
transmitted in the Daozang. Among the poetry uniquely preserved here, there are 
seventy-one pieces by Song Defang. His biography in y# Zhongnan shan zuting 
xianzhen neizhuan 3.23b mentions his collected works under the title Lequanji ^ A 
H, a work that is no longer extant. Our collection (8.i8a-2oa) also includes eight 
poems by Langran zi (d. 989), corresponding to poems 1, 2, 3, 4, 27, 28, 29, and 30 in 
271 Tabcuan langran zijindao shi. In the present collection, these poems are followed 
by a biographical colophon signed Fanghu Zhizu A 32 Al JE and dated 1131. 

Juan 8 contains mostly poems on alchemy, such as a “Qinyuan chun A IS A ” 
similar to 136 Lit Chunyang zhenren Qinyuan chun danci zhujie. There is also “Chun- 
yang zhenren baizi tu filial® AHAISl” (8.i7b-i8a), which has a number of variant 
readings with respect to loss Chunyang zhenren hunchengji i.i3a-b. Among the poems 
ascribed to semilegendary persons, those by Lu Dongbin are the most numerous, 
totaling 115. Some poems were revealed by spirit writing, like those by legendary im- 
mortals such as Han Xiangzi ft jf§A (8.i7a-b), or by the Taoist deity Xin tianjun A 
A©, revealed on Mount Wudang (3.11a). 

The poems of master Feng and of Yu Ji have been edited separately, under the same 
title as the present collection, in a single juan, by Jin Tianrui A Aiffii (preface dated 
1364). That version quotes 2. Minghe yuyin in eight juan. 

Catherine Despeux 



Addendum 

In the early Ming (1368-1644), another edition of this anthology was printed under 
the title Quanzhen zongyan fangwai xuanyan A [II A HR A A A H (see Boltz, A survey 
of Taoist literature , 188-90). This later edition, preserved in the Taiwan National Library 
and the Naikaku bunko R] Pff] A SE is shorter but includes some additional prose texts. 
It features the same preface by Yu Ji iMM (see Guoli zhongyang tushuguan, Guoli 
zhongyang tushuguan shanben xubajilu , vol. A* - 4 , 414)- This preface, along with Yu’s 
and Feng’s original poems are also found in Yu’s anthology, Daoyuanyigao 6.3a-4a (cf. 
Chen Yuan, Daojia jinshi liie , 798). A note appended to this text by Jin Tianrui A? A 
IS, dated 1364, mentions that Master Feng’s works were also included in a collection 
titled Dongyuanji (Daoyuanyigao 6.i8a-b). Indeed, almost all of Feng’s poems found 




[ U52 ] 3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order 



3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1155 ] 






in iioo Minghe yuyin are also extant in 1064 Dongyuanji, the work of an author known 
as Master Fish Trap (Changquan zi jpH-T), who took refuge in the Quanzhen com- 
munity after the final onslaught of the Mongols on the Jin in 1232. Th c Minghe yuyin 
was to become the main vehicle by which Quanzhen literature spread in Southern 
China. 

Vincent Goossaert 

Yunshan ji H Ul Dl 

8 juan 

By Ji Zhizhen ® flt ; prefaces by Pei Xian H 'M , zi Zifa -f - ?£ , dated 1250, and 

by Wang E 3 EH; dated 1265 

1140 (fasc. 783-784) 

“Clouds and Mountains.” The author of this literary collection was one of the fol- 
lowers of the Quanzhen master Wang Zhijin. Pei Xian states that his friend Lun 
Boyu 5# Jf) presented him with this collection, which Lun wished to have printed 
and distributed. Pei’s preface was presumably commissioned for that occasion. In 1265 
Wang E wrote his preface as a favor for Li Zhichang, with whom he had long been 
acquainted. Li Zhichang was in turn acquainted with Pei Xian. This collection of 
Ji Zhizhen’s literary works was printed in the author’s lifetime. 

The collection is arranged according to literary categories. It contains prose, songs, 
and poems of various meters. Most texts deal with themes typical of the Quanzhen 
school, e.g. “Traveling like Clouds” (3.3b) or ‘The Three Teachings” (4.15a). Many of 
the texts are dedicated by the author to his friends and acquaintances. Juan 7-8 con- 
tain inscriptions concerning temples and rituals, among other things, some of which 
describe Ji Zhizhen’s life as a Taoist and follower of the Quanzhen school. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Xianleji fill ^ ffs 

5 juan 

By Liu Chuxuan ^\WL~&,hao Changshengzi (after 1201) 

1141 (fasc. 785) 

“Pleasure of the Immortals.” The author of this literary collection is the Quanzhen 
patriarch Liu Chuxuan. To his Taoist name “Changsheng zi” are added the words 
“Shenxian wuwei yingyuan 

The “Discourses on Guilt and Good fortune [in the Light of the] Heavenly Tao,” 
which introduces the collection (i.ia-3b), consists of 102 sentences. The discourses 
contain antithetical descriptions of human actions with their ensuing retributions. 
The lyrical texts that follow the discourses present didactic instructions, for example, 
describing the way of life that will lead to the experience of the “pleasures of the im- 



mortals.” Liu Chuxuan, who had met with Wang Chongyang in 1169, lived and 
taught as a Quanzhen Taoist in Shaanxi and Shandong. He also performed Taoist litur- 
gies. In 1201 he acted as master of ordinations for the order (3.9b). Liu Chuxuan 
combines the way of life of the Quanzhen school with the profession of the Taoist 
priest. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Jianwu ji iff U§ 

2 juan 

By Ma Dan yang MJPim (1123-1184) 

1142 (fasc. 786) 

“Gradual Enlightenment.” This literary collection contains lyrical works by Ma 
Danyang from Mount Kunyu |J I (Shandong). Their inclusion suggests that 
the collection was compiled during the years 1182 and 1183. 

The lyrical texts describe Ma Dan yang’s personal development. Some of the 
texts are dedicated to friends, like Liu Chuxuan (1.34b), Qiu Chuji (1.19a), and 
Hao Datong (1.35b). A few names, for example, Quan Zhiwei (2.7b) and 

Wang Zhixuan :E£tL£ (1.2b), connect this collection with other works written by 
Ma Danyang (see 1150 Danyang shenguang can 5a, 6a). In accordance with the tide, 
Ma Danyang presents several finked poems (e.g., 2.26a-28a) featuring the gradual 
cultivation of self that a Quanzhen Taoist should strive toward (1.26a, 27b). 

Florian C. Reiter 

Caotangji ^ Jjf % 

41 fols. 

By Wang Dangui 3E JPS, zi Changling H $y , hao Boyun zi EP It ~P ; late twelfth 

century 

1143 (fasc. 786) 

“Grass-Hall.” This literary collection is the work of Wang Dangui, a follower of 
Ma Danyang. The two men probably met in 1183, when Wang was living at Mount 
Kunyu in Shandong (i8a-b). 

The collection includes “Instructions for Novices” (e.g., 4oa-b). One text features 
the bestowal of a Taoist name on a student or new follower named Yang Deyuan fj§ tf) 
Ja (nb). However, most texts in this collection have descriptive and poetic contents 
referring to the fife of the Quanzhen Taoist. This way of fife, which was free of all 
social restraints and obligations, is represented by the terms “Grass-Hall (Moon and 
Wind).” Attention should be drawn to the section entitled “Building Activities” ( 1233 
Chongyang lijiao shiwu lun 2b), where it is said that the hut built of reeds or “grasses” 
constitutes the ideal surroundings within which to practice the Quanzhen way. The 



1 




[list] 3.B. 9 The Quanzhen Order 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ ass ] 



collection also contains many dedications written for disciples, friends, and acquain- 
tances. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Zimnji g 

11 fols. 

Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) or Yuan (1279-1368) 

1144 (fasc. 787) 

“Spontaneity.” The author of this literary collection is unknown. The texts make 
some references to the founders of the Quanzhen school. This fact as well as the work’s 
terminology connect the collection with the movement. The texts must have been 
written and compiled either during the late Jin or the Yuan period (iob-na). 

The “Ci-§ 5 ] lyrics on the Tao” is concerned with physiological and meditative self- 
cultivation. It refers to Zhongli Quan and Lu Dongbin as the patriarchs of 
those methods of self-cultivation (4b, 11a). “Sudden enlightenment” is emphasized 
over book-learning as the way to ascend as an immortal (8a). The state of Wuwei zhen- 
ren lj| A will spontaneously result from the prescribed methods. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Xuanxu zi mingzhen ji )£ J H T" HI Hi 

12 fols. 

By Xuanchong shi % ft 1 BfJJ ; preface by Zhang Zhiming (rfliSlP; dated 1251 

1145 (fasc. 787) 

“Heralding Truth.” The preface to this literary collection was composed in 1251 on 
the occasion of the tide’s printing. The preface suggests that the name Xuanxu zi was 
missing from the original tide. It is likely that the tide of this work was extended by 
later editors. The honorary name Xuanchong shi may refer to the Taoist Liu Zhiyuan 
M ^ (fl.at the end of the Jin), an identification strengthened by indications in the 
preface. Liu Zhiyuan and his disciple Zhang Zhiming lived for a short while at the 
Longxing guan II PI W. temple in Fenyin (Shanxi). Liu Zhiyuan was an admirer 
of Qiu Chuji. 

Most poems in this collection are dedicated to friends and acquaintances. There 
are some descriptive and contemplative texts like “Admonishing Contemporaries” 
(4b-5b). Themes found in texts such as “Sudden Enlightenment” (2a) and “The Way 
of Life” (4b, 6a) are typical of the Quanzhen school. 

Florian C. Reiter 



Baoguangji 

3 juan 

By Yin Zhiping zi Dahe orTaihe, hao Qinghe zi (1169-1251); preface by 

Yanxia yiren JUft ill A, dated 1299 

1146 (fasc. 787) 

“Anthology of Concealed Lights.” Yin Zhiping was heir to Qiu Chuji (1148-1227) 
as leader of the Quanzhen school. The present work is a poetic anthology. Its title, 
derived from the Zhuangzi (“Qiwu lun ”) alludes to the name of a pavilion in 

the Baoxuan temple in the Da Changchun gong in the capital. Yin 

enjoyed spending time in this pavilion, hence the name for his book. 

The first chapter contains 258 poems and two prose texts: the first, a discourse 
(“Yulu |p Mk 42b~44a) composed on demand for a Tianzhen daoren iR jtf A (also 

named Longxi gong IfltSA), explaining the basic tenets of the Quanzhen school, and 
the second, “straightforward words” (“Zhiyan iH H,” 44a-4ja) aimed at the Taoists of 
the Youde temple (D $g of the Chongyang gong monastery, to remind them 

of their privileges and obligations to those fortunate enough to dwell at the cradle of 
their teaching, the Zuting JM . The two remaining chapters include 169 lyric poems 

(ci | §]). The poems and lyrics describe Yin’s travels, thoughts, religious life, and con- 
tacts with Taoists and Confucian scholars. 

Some pieces are dated. One of them confirms an event frequently mentioned by 
Yin’s biographers: when Qiu Chuji returned to the capital after his travels to the 
West, he settled at the Taiji gong temple. Yin stayed for a while with his mas- 

ter, but afterward renounced life in the town and withdrew to the Longyang guan 
fiHU temple in Dexing county Pi Wr . . These events have been dated to the years 
guiwei (1223) or jiashen (1224; see 17s Qizhen nianpu i8b-i9a; pss Zhongnan than zuting 
xianzhen neizhuan 3.2b-3a), or again to the year yiyou (1225; see 973 Ganshuixianyuan lu 
3.4b; 9S7 Gu Louguan ziyun yanqing ji 2.4b). The poem here pertaining to these events 
gives the date Yin took leave of his master as the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh 
month of the yzatjiashen Ep Fp (1224; i.9b-ioa). 

According to the preface by Yanxia yiren, the anthology was published by Du 
Dekang fitiiJif, prefect of Qinzhou jib 'i'll , who was acquainted with Yin Zhiping. 
Du once invited Yin to perform a large jiao Sf| in the Qinzhou area. Our anthology 
features a lyric poem composed as a farewell gift to Du Dekang (3.8b-9a). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Chen Yuan, Daojiajinshi Hie, 538-41, 567-70, 680-81, 689-90. 

Kwong Fling Foon 



1 




[ ns 6 ] 3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order 



3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order [ n $7 J 



Xiyun ji jgj f| H 

3 juan 

By Guo Zhicheng hao Dongmingzi j[3] IJ1J -f- (1219-1293) 

1147 (fasc. 788) 

“Anthology of Western Clouds.” Guo Zhicheng was the disciple of and heir to 
Song Defang. Before becoming leader of the Quanzhen school in 1272, he stayed 
in the Lequan an HjH ^ temple and then in the Yunxi guan HfHH temple on Mount 
Jin’ge ^zfSjlJj (Yunzhou ff ) outside the capital. The burning of the Daozang in 
1281 took place during his mandate as Taoist leader. He retired four years later to the 
Pengshan H monastery (see the inscription “Xuanmen zhangjiao da zongshi 

cunshen yinghua dongming zhenren Qigong daoxing zhi bei H $ ^ ^ zk Jr 

£.W” in Chen Yuan, Daojia jinshi lue, 699-700). 

The present anthology collects 238 poems, all of them quatrains ( qiyan jueju C 
They do not come in chronological sequence, but are ordered according 
to the themes of a Taoist life. The first chapter is completely devoted to the author 
himself, dealing with six topics; 13 poems focus on his life in the mountains (“Shanju 
(I|®”), 50 on his states of mind (“Shuhuai J$;tf!”), 5 detail his pleasures (“Qianxing 
JfiPJ”), 7 are occasional pieces (“Ouzuo f$ff”), 2 are on leisure (“Xianyong |*]|fc”), 
and 2 others were written for amusement (“Xizuo fifp”). Throughout, the concern 
is with the poet’s enjoyment of the contemplative life and his dislike for the agitation 
of everyday life. Some poems are more specific. For instance, the first poem must have 
been written after 1285, for Guo mentions his retirement (1.1a). The thirtieth and forty- 
fifth poems of the “Shuhai” set were written when he was in his forties (i.5a-b, 6b); 
the thirty-second and thirty-sixth in the same set may allude to the conflicts between 
Taoists and Buddhists (1.5b, 6a). 

The second chapter is less homogenous. Poems were written for various purposes, 
such as public speeches (2.2a-4a), advice (2.4a-b), answers to questions on Taoist 
practice or other topics (2.5a-6a), homages (2.6a-8b), birthday wishes (2.9b), and 
condolences (2.9b-ioa). 

The events mentioned in the third chapter are just as varied as in the second but 
more decisive for the author’s official life: his missions at the imperial behest to Ji’nan 
if 1^ (1273), Taishan, Tiantan, Lake Dongting j|5ll!$j, Zhurong feng fKSWf , Jiyuan 
if ffl, and Mount Song SJ [Jj to present offerings to mountains and rivers (3.6a-8a). 
There are, moreover, a number of poems composed to match others’ rhymes (“Ciyun 
'XaM,” 3-ia— 3a), poems on traditional celebrations (3.3b), as well as on the weather 
(3-4a-b), on temples (3.5b, 8.a-b, 9b, 10a), on geographical sites (3-7b-9a, 10b), on 
Guo’s health in 1293 (3.11a), and others. Finally, there are two poems bidding farewell 
to the world (“Yishi iltS,” 3.nb-i2a). 



Dongxuan jinyu ji ifsf ^ T ® 

10 juan 

By Ma Danyang M TJ PH , hao Wuwei qingjing I® Mill If (1123-1184) 

1149 (fasc. 789-790) 

“Gold and Jade of the Cavern Heaven.” This literary collection contains works writ- 
ten by Ma Danyang from Mount Kunyu Mill) (Shandong) arranged according to 
genre. Some of the texts were written in Shandong as late as 1183. The collection was 
edited after the death of Ma Danyang in that year (6.8b). The key words in the title 
of this collection are derived from Ma’s Taoist name, Yu II , which symbolizes the 
essence of his refined and sublimated body, in accordance with Quanzhen teachings 
(e.g., 7.11a, 10.13b). In 1183, Ma Danyang lived for some time in a Gold and Jade 
Hermitage (1.23a). 

Ma Danyang himself is the theme of the literary presentations in this collection. 
The work gives many insights into his way of life. It speaks about friends and acquain- 
tances and displays his methods, like the “burning of nets and boats,” which would 
effect the miracle of the Fata Morgana (9.9b). Ma Danyang affirms his position 
within the ranks of the Quanzhen Taoists, referring to the legacy of Wang Chong- 
yang, which he had received shortly before Wang died in 1170. Part of this legacy was 
the instruction to spread the teachings of the Quanzhen school (i.2a-3b). 

Florian C. Reiter 

Danyang shenguang can J 5 } PH it 

37 fols. 

By Ma Jue H ££; preface by Ning Shichang Iff fjf'Si, dated 1175 

1150 (fasc. 791) 

“Radiance of the Spiritual Force of Danyang.” This literary collection consists of 
one hundred ci - |Sj lyrics written to the tune “Manting fang .” This number is 

also indicated in Ning Shichang’s preface, which says that the texts were composed in 
Shaanxi after the death of Wang Chongyang in 1170 (2a). 

There are verses dedicated to friends and acquaintances, some of whom are men- 
tioned in 1149 Dongxuan jinyu ji. Certain texts display concepts or ideas then current 
in the Quanzhen school. Quietude and purity of mind were the most desirable state. 
The achievement of such a favorable state is referred to in the tide expression “radiance 
of the spiritual force” ( shenguang can a formula that was said to allow one’s 

“original face” to emerge. This formula links the present work with other works of the 
early Quanzhen school, notably ns2 Tunguangji 4.9a and ii4iXianleji 4.5b. 

Florian C. Reiter 



Kwong Hing Foon 






[ usS ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 

Wuzhenji f§RH 

2 juan 

By Master Li xiansheng hao Tongxuan zi 21 2 ; ^p; thirteenth century 

1151 (fasc. 791) 

“Awakening to Truth” This literary collection was written by a Mr. Li (or Taoist 
Li), who hailed from Mount Jinping (in Henan). The author says that Wang 
Chongyang was his patriarch (1.26a), and thus he affiliates himself with the Quan- 
zhen school. Taoist Li most likely lived in the thirteenth century, as the quotation of 
Song Defang (1183-1247) suggests (1.19b). 

The collection comprises songs and poems of various meters, some with dedica- 
tions to acquaintances and friends. It also includes didactic texts admonishing disciples 
(e.g., i.2jb-24a, 2.9b-ioa) or encouraging “persons, who have not yet realized the 
Tao” (i.9a-9b). Some of the demands clearly refer to tenets of the Quanzhen school, 
such as deliberate detachment from one’s social background (2.1a) or retirement to a 
hermitage (1.25b). Some texts express the sentiments of the author and describe his 
way of life. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Chongyang quanzhen ji JI PH ^ fl- Ji 

13 juan 

By Wang Zhe 3 : !§, hao Chongyang zi preface by Fan Yi $3? iff, dated 

1188 

1153 (fasc. 793-795) 

“Complete Perfection according to Chongyang.” This literary collection presents 
lyrical works by Wang Zhe. The poems are arranged by genre. When Wang Zhe 
was still alive, a collection of his works entitled Quanzhen ji already existed (see 1149 
Dongxuan jinyu ji 1 .2b). “Zhongnan shan Chongyang zushi xianji ji j^f il| Jr |S§ £§ gjp 

fill Eft uS” (a title dated 1232 in 973 Ganshui xianyuan lu i.i2b-i3a) cites the work Quan- 
zhen qianhouji The preface by Wang Zhe himself is not extant (see 17s 

Qizhen nianpu 5b-6a). The preface by Fan Yi dated 1188, explains that the poems 
had circulated in Shaanxi and that Liu Chuxuan had them reprinted in order to 
make them available in Shandong as well. That Shaanxi edition comprised nine juan. 
Presumably, the editors of the Ming Daozang of 1445 rearranged the materials into 
thirteen juan. The quotations of the Wang Chongyan quanzhen ji in 100s Zhouyi cantong 
qi fahui 2.i8b-i9a are not found in the present edition, which is incomplete. 

This collection contains a great number of dedications, for example, to local ad- 
ministrators. The texts are often designed to instruct and encourage. Wang Zhe 
(Chongyang) also speaks about self-cultivation, about the conversion of Ma Dan- 
yang, and about the line of transmission in the Quanzhen school. Wang also gives 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1IS9 ] 

autobiographic information. The materials gathered here thus accurately reflect the 
teachings and personality of Wang Zhe. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Chongyang jiaohua ji M PH %. f t JI 

3 juan 

By Wang Zhe 3 EH, hao Chongyang zi fi £§ ; prefaces dated 1183 

1154 (fasc. 795-796) 

“Instruction and Conversion according to Chongyang.” This literary collection 
originally had the title Jiaohua xiashou chi (see preface, 6a). Both this 

title and nss Chongyang fenli shihuaji are the remains of a larger compilation in three 
parts, dated 1183. The title of the third part, now lost, was “Hao lixiang £F [ji M ]” 

(Content to Leave Home). There are six prefaces, written by followers of Ma Dan- 
yang and dated 1183. The prefaces on ia-ioa refer to the original edition. Each of its 
three parts originally had individual prefaces attached to them. The preface by Liang 
Dong (ioa-nb) refers to the present work, and the preface on nb-i3b refers to 
the now lost “Hao lixiang.” The appendix of our collection contains a text erroneously 
labeled “postface” that also refers to the “Hao lixiang.” Among the authors of the pref- 
aces, Fan Yi fSW (2b-4a) is a good example of Ma Danyang’s local connections in 
Shandong (cf. 1153 Chongyang quanzhen ji). 

This collection contains lyrical works by Ma Dan yang and Wang Zhe. It was 
originally printed in Shaanxi between the years 1170 and 1182. Because of the great 
geographical distance between Shaanxi and Shandong, a new edition had to be printed 
in Shandong in 1183. This happened before the death of Ma Danyang that year 
(preface, 9a-9b). The texts in this collection focus on the initiation of Ma Danyang 
by Wang Zhe into the Quanzhen teachings. They also feature the development of 
the relationship between the two men. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Chongyan fenli shihua ji M ft ISS + it JI 

2 juan 

By Wang Zhe IH, hao Chongyang zi preface by Ma Dabian Milk 

$?, dated 1183 

1155 (fasc. 796) 

“Dividing the Pear in Periods of Ten [Days].” In this title, the expression fenli jj 
“dividing the pear,” can be understood literally and metaphorically. It stands for 
the phrase/w/w fenli , “husband and wife separate” (see 1149 Dongxuan jinyu 

ji 7.6b). “Periods of ten days” refers to the time schedule according to which Wang 
Zhe distributed fifty-five pieces of pear to Ma Danyang. When the number 55 



1 




[ii6o] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ u 6 i ] 



had been reached, Wang Zhe had achieved his purpose: Ma Danyang and his 
wife separated, and each of them retired to live a celibate life as befitted Quanzhen 
Taoists. 

This collection contains lyrics featuring the conversion of Ma Danyang and his 
wife, who both joined the Quanzhen school and made their way as members of the 
Seven Zhenren. Each time Wang Zhe distributed the pieces of pear, he also com- 
posed lyrics of various meters, to which Ma Danyang responded. On the compila- 
tion of this literary collection, compare the article on iiS4 Chongyang jiaohua ji. 

Florian C . Reiter 

Chongyang zhenren shou Danyang ershisi jueM^^ 

4 fols. 

Twelfth century 

1158 (fasc. 796) 

‘Twenty-four Instructions of the Zhenren Chongyang to Danyang.” This collection 
was compiled by followers of Ma Danyang, who is called “Master Danyang” (4b). 
The text presents definitions of concepts and terms phrased in the manner of didactic 
dialogues. The number 24 signifies completeness. 

This work aims to demonstrate that the Quanzhen teachings did justice to the key 
concepts of the Three Teachings (Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism). The Quan- 
zhen Taoist and practitioner wishing to live up to their standard had to abandon all 
profane pursuits. 

Florian C . Reiter 

Panxiji fif V&Wt 

6 juan 

By Qiu Chuji ElIMM, hao Changchun zi A# A; prefaces dated 1186-1208 

1159 (fasc. 797) 

“Panxi Collection.” The tide of this literary collection derives from a place name in 
Shaanxi, where Qiu Chuji “from Qixia ® ft” (Shandong) resided between 1174 and 
1180. The collection contains lyrical works, some of which must have been composed 
after his departure from Panxi (see, e.g., 1.9a, the poem dated 1194). There are four 
prefaces. The first, by Hu Guangqian fiflAIi, is dated 1186, and the last, by Chen 
Daren PitAfi , is dated 1208. They give no indication as to the editing and printing 
history of this collection. The Peking National Library holds a printed edition that 
is believed to date from 1209. The Peking edition shows that the work originally 
comprised three juan. There are conspicuous omissions and distortions in the present 
version (cf. the descriptions by Wang Yuliang and Reiter cited below). 



Most of the texts convey autobiographical details and contemplative reflections, 
which mirror the attitude of the Quanzhen Taoist. Mention is made of the later so- 
journs of the Taoist in Longmen shan f| f'j [Jj and Zhongnan shan ^ [^J | 1 ( . The texts 
also speak about Qiu Chuji’s contacts with Liu Chuxuan, Tan Chuduan, and 
Ma Danyang. This work antedates Qiu Chuji’s visit to the temporary residence 
of the Mongol Khan in 1222, but it mentions the author’s contacts with the Jin em- 
peror Shizong in 1188 (3.6a-7a). The text Song of Azure Sky (“Qingtian ge ft ASA’) 
(3.ia-ib) is the basis for 137 Qingtian ge zhushi. 

bibliography 

Reiter, “A praise of Buddha”; Wang Yuliang, “Qui Chuji Panxi ji”\ Zhu Yueli, “ Panxi ji 
chuangzuo shijian kao.” 

Florian C. Reiter 

Taigu ji ft A ft 

4 juan 

By Hao Datong |$ AO, hao Guangning zi 2=2 ft and Taigu daoren ft ft jjf 

ft; prefaces by Fan Yuanxi ft HI Bit and others, dated 1178-1236 

1161 (fasc. 798) 

“Works of [Master] High Antiquity.” This work contains the few remains of a 
larger collection comprising fifteen juan in three books. The extant texts deal with the 
cosmic elements and forces represented in ancient documents like the Hetu ft |g| and 
Luoshu [ft If. Such documents preserved the guidelines for “the seeker of the Way.” 
Hao Datong explains the title in that sense (see his preface, dated 1178, 6b-8a). The 
preface by Feng Bi (lilt (ia-3b) introduces the title Kunyu wenji It© Aft, which 
is said to stem from the time of “the Zhenren [Hao Datong].” However, it is not 
clear what relationship between this work and the Taigu ji may have existed. Most 
important for the revision and new edition of Hao Datong’s literary works were 
the efforts of his disciple Fan Yuanxi (see prefaces, 5a-6a). Judging by the indications 
concerning the contents and titles of Hao Datong’s literary works in the different 
prefaces, it appears that substantial materials were lost after 1236. 

This work still contains the “Zhouyi cantong qi jianyao shiyi 
H” (i.ia-8b), Explanations about the Essential Contents of the Zhouyi cantong qi (the 
preface of this text is dated 1178). Thirty-three charts and expositions deal with topics 
taken from the Tijing. There are also thirty poems on the Gold Elixir (4.ia-8b), using 
the terminology of neidan. 

Florian C. Reiter 




[ u62 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1163 ] 



Danyang zhenren zhiyan H PI3 R AlS B 

3 fols. 

Twelfth century 

1234 (fasc. 989) 

“Forthright Words of the Zhenren Danyang.” As its subtitle (“Instructions for the 
Disciples”) indicates, this text presents a practical and theoretical program for Taoists. 
Compiled by an unknown follower of Ma Danyang, these instructions were prob- 
ably transmitted around 1178 to followers in Longmen shan !tf E ! [JLl (Shaanxi). They 
correspond with parts of ios7 Danyang zhenren yulu. Although there are parallels, this 
work has to be regarded as an independent edition. Its introductory passages can be 
found in 1256 Zhenxicm zhizhiyulu 1.1a ff. The text “Ma Danyang zhenren zhiyan 
li§ R Afil?” in I2S7 Qunxian ymyu zuanji 2.i5a-i6a is not identical with this work. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Zhenxian zhizhi yulu R fill "|S jj§ HI 

2 juan 

Compiled by Xuanquan zi Ail: A, hao Haitian qiuyue daoren XfKR jjf A; 

Yuan (1279-1368) 

1256 (fasc. 998) 

“Recorded Discourses and Forthright Instmctions of the Zhenren and Immortals.” 
The author, an unknown follower of Quanzhen Taoism, compiled these texts after the 
death of Yin Qinghe A'/flAP in 1251 (Yin’s Discourses are presented in juan 2). 

Juan 1 of this work contains discourses of Ma Danyang, which correspond in 
part (i.ia-2a) to passages in 1234 Danyang zhenren zhiyan ia-2a and in ios7 Danyang 
zhenren yulu. The “Recorded Discourses [of Tan Chuduan]” is the same as 1160 
Shuiyunji i.2ob-2ia. The present work also preserves some records that otherwise 
would have been lost: see the texts concerning Liu Changsheng [Liu Chu- 

xuan] (i.iob-i2a) and Hao Datong (i.i9a-22b). Although the contents of these 
texts fit well with earlier Quanzhen materials, their origins are unknown. There is one 
short description of a dream referring to the theme “rebirth and retribution,” which 
seems to be somewhat out of place within the frame of this work (i.i8a-i9a). 

Florian C. Reiter 

Lifeng laoren jiM AM 

By Yu Daoxian hao Lifeng ziMt&'F (1168-1232) 

1264 (fasc. 1001) 

“Collected Works of the Old Man of Lifeng.” This title comprises 319 poems, of 
which 225 are four-line poems, and 94 eight-line poems. The author was a follower 
of Liu Chuxuan (1147-1203), one of the direct disciples of Wang Zhi, whom he 



served for several years at the Changsheng guan it A IS! temple (see 2.29b and 297 Lishi 
zhenxian tidao tongjian xubian 2.7a). After this service, Liu went to southern China, 
where his reputation spread rapidly. During the Zhengda era (1224-1231), he was 
made superintendent of the Taiqing gong A iff Hr temple at Bozhou Ifl'J'H (Henan), 
the birthplace of Laozi. In 1232 he went to Lushi (HA in the south of Henan, where 
he died the same year. The main source for Yu’s life is the tomb inscription by Yuan 
Haowen (1190-1257) in 973 Ganshui xianyuan lu 4.2b-5b. 

One third of the poems in the present collection are intended as “teachings” ( shi 

or goo a ). Another third are dedicated to friends, and a final third are written in 
answer to queries from disciples or in honor of certain occasions. Most of the recipi- 
ents were at that time living in Henan, not far from Luoyang. Many were of Jurchen 
origin and were high officials such as censors, astronomers, and prefects. Forty-four 
poems are addressed to women, either Taoist nuns ( gu ) or high-born ladies (Juren 

mxy 

The general themes of the poems are mysticism, peace, and emptiness of the mind, 
the joys of hermetic life. Only a few poems refer to Inner Alchemy. 

Catherine Despeux 

Qinghe zhenren beiyou yulu iff I U R A J ti In £1 

4 juan 

By Yin Zhiping AiS 2 ?, hao Qinghe (if 111 (1169-1251); compiled by Duan 

Zhijian in 1237 

1310 (fasc. 1017) 

“Recorded Sayings of the Northern Journey of the Zhenren Pure Harmony.” This 
is one of the richest pieces of the Quanzhen literature. Yin Zhiping had been head of 
the Quanzhen order for six years when he made his journey to south Liaoning in the 
autumn 1233. Two of his four epitaphs detail this voyage: those by Li Zhiquan 
(1191-1261; in Chen Yuan, Daojiajinshi lue, 538-41) and by Wang Yun 3 : ff (1227-1304; 
in Qiujian xiansheng daquan wenji 56.8a-i3b). All four epitaphs, as well as Yin’s biog- 
raphy in gss Zhongnan shan zuting xianzhen neizhuan (3.ia-6a), mention the present 
text, pointing to its popularity. It is a major source for Yin’s (somewhat standardized) 
hagiography, for example, his dramatic first encounter with Liu Chuxuan (2.16), 
which he says he has never disclosed before and which is narrated in all the above- 
mentioned texts. 

In the course of his journey, Yin gave general instructions to the assemblies of seven 
different monasteries, apparently all within a small area north of today’s Jinzhou $tfi 
'J'[J . The text was assembled by disciples, among whom the otherwise unknown Duan 
Zhijian is mentioned as the compiler. Of the three prefaces, the first two were written 
by local literati in 1237, and the last in 1240 by Yin’s successor to the seat of Quanzhen 




[ ii64 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 116s ] 



patriarch, Li Zhichang (1193-1256). The prefaces indicate that the edition was 
commissioned and financed by Du Dekang fi trl JsM , also responsible for the edition 
of 1146 Baoguangji. Back from his northern journey, Yin moved to the East, where he 
engaged actively in temple repairing and building. He met Prefect Du in Shanxi in 1235 
and performed rainmaking feats at his request, earning Du’s gratitude. Actually, Du 
was already a convert of Qiu Chuji’s, and his wife a fervent follower of Quanzhen 
(cf. Chen Yuan, Daojia jinshi Hie , 480-81). 

Most of the master’s fifty-eight discourses were not written in response to a specific 
question, but when there is an introduction, evoking a place, date, name, or question, 
it is by an editorial oddity attached to the previous paragraph. The last two juan form 
a separate entity; they record the master’s comments on Daode jing at the Tongxian 
guan MU temple. The chapters of the Daode jing jjt ti $f are commented upon in 
their usual order. They are named before the exegesis and range from the first to the 
seventy-third; they do not all receive individual attention. It may be that the series is 
incomplete. The style, however, is consistent from the opening chapters to the last, 
and the master freely uses narrative discourse throughout. 

Although this text, like Yin Zhiping’s other yulu (juan 2 of 1256 Zhenxian 
zhizhi yulu), uses fewer vernacular expressions than, for instance, 1059 Panshan Qiyun 
Wang zhenren yulu (which suggests some rewriting before publication), it is none- 
theless highly narrative and exoteric. The audience comprises an entire assembly, no 
doubt including the local Taoists, residents of the monasteries, lay patrons and associa- 
tion members. One of the protagonists is an artisan of religious sculpture (2.4a). Yin 
stresses that given the low spiritual level of most newcomers to Taoism, certain subde 
teachings are better left aside. He even shuns the discussion of chapter 42 of Daode 
jing, arguing that this should not be aired in public. All the same, he repeatedly dis- 
misses the usefulness of secret teachings, or oral transmissions. To prove his point, Yin 
makes extensive use of stories concerning himself and the Quanzhen patriarchs. Thus, 
though he never met him, Yin evokes Wang Chongyang, most of all through the 
striking narrative of Wang’s last moments (2.9b-na). Yin’s own masters, Ma Dan- 
yang and Qiu Chuji ( shifu , “my master”), are invoked on almost every page; Wang 
Chuyi EElM — and Liu Chuxuan are mentioned frequendy; Hao Datong and 
Tan Chuduan, several times. Only Sun Buer is completely absent. 

Of particular importance to Yin’s rhetoric is the notion of merit. It is endlessly 
repeated that without merit no achievement is possible. The patriarchs themselves 
had reached the Tao only because of their store of merit from previous existences. The 
actual acquisition of merit is not clearly detailed, but it is connected to cultivation of 
mind as well as service to the community. In this context, monastic fife is essential (see 
3.11b), and several examples of independent-minded Taoists gone astray prove this 
further. This is again a theme developed in a section of Yin’s anthology 1146 Baoguang 



ji (1.42b), also called yulu: solitude and subde metaphysics are of no benefit to young 
Taoists. 

The problem of language and transmission of the Tao is at the heart of the Quan- 
zhen masters’ discourse. Yin Zhiping is nowhere as radical on this point as the Chan 
masters he is so keen on quoting. Whereas oral exchanges with the master are promi- 
nent in his pedagogy, reading the classics is equally necessary. He is also ready to allude 
to Quanzhen poetry (cf. 2.17b). On the other hand, the Tao is ineffable, and die words 
of the saints can only be understood by an accomplished adept. The authors of the 
prefaces also try to deal with the tension between the urge to educate, the distrust for 
all techniques and recipes, and the wordlessness of the Tao. Therefore, Yin’s approach 
to the Daode jing is very practical, and he praises the Heshang gong commentary. 
His interpretation, though, is not an alchemical reading, but points to ways of life and 
relations to society. Song Huizong’s (r. 1100-1125) commentary is discussed; Su Zhe’s 
commentary ( 691 Daode zhenjing zhu) is also used, despite its Buddho-Confucian 
approach. 

Given this ecumenical stance, persons and texts quoted cover a large range: from 
the Confucian classics (Lunyu mm, Mengzi Tijing Jpjff ); Taoist scriptures 

(Zhuangzi ft 1 , Liezi JflJ Y , Yinfujing If , Qjngjing jing ff If , and works by 

Zhang Boduan); Buddhist sutra (the Lotus sutra, the Avatamsaka sutra ) ; Chan 
masters (his favorite is Yongjia zkil [665-713], whose Yongjia ji circulated widely 
outside the Buddhist canon); to poets (in particular, Du Fu ttffj [712-770]). 

Vincent Goossaert 

Huizhen ji ^ if] 

5 juan 

By Wang Jichang j£ cf Hr , hao Chaoran zi M ~P (active early thirteenth century) 

247 (fasc. 116-117) 

“Anthology on Gathering Truth.” This tide represents the collected works of Wang 
Jichang, who also authored a short exegetical work, 313 Shengtian jing songjie. Wang 
was active around 1220-1240, as we know from the funerary steles of two of his pupils, 
the Quanzhen masters Li Zhiming (1200-1266) and Shen Zhizhen jsj 

(1210-1284; see 973 Ganshui xianyuan lu 6.22a and 8.26a). A short undated preface by 
his disciple Yang Zhipu suggests that Wang’s skills in neidan f*| frf were so 

great as to attract immortals. The first juan introduces the basic cosmological notions 
through charts and comments, and the principle of reversal that was central to neidan. 
Wang then goes on to alchemical procedures. Juan 2 through 5 are lyric poems (ci gSj) 
on various tunes: those in juan 2 and 3 are topically arranged, while those in juan 4 
and 5 are independent, freer lyrical compositions. 

In contrast to his pupil Liu Zhiyuan’s anthology (248 Qjzhenji), the present work 




[ ii66 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 






3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1167 ] 



introduces a rather systematic method based on wuxing Hff (Five Phases), trigrams, 
ordinal, and cyclical numbers. In the more theoretical first juan, Wang only occasion- 
ally uses the physiological imagery that is prevalent in the last four juan. Throughout 
the whole work, the author rarely insists on moral training. He frequendy quotes 
Zhang Boduan and only once alludes to Wang Chongyang (3.16a). However 
technical the work might seem, the lyrical voice is not absent, as in the first ci of juan 4, 
which is very much in the style of mainstream ‘Taoist feelings” ( daoqing iff Iff ) poetry 
that focused on the misery of this world and the bliss of immortality. 

Vincent Goossaert 

Qizhen ji (H tfc 

3 juan 

By Liu Zhiyuan <$[J .cf. , hao Tongxuan zi (1186-1244) 

248 (fasc. 117) 

“Anthology of Expounding Truth.” A preface by the otherwise unknown Dong Shi- 
yan MSfi U , dated 1244, indicates that the author was a disciple of the Quanzhen mas- 
ter Wang Jichang zEpj H, author of 247 Huizhen ji. An obituary notice (3.i3b-i4b), 
which largely repeats the preface, specifies that Liu Zhiyuan died aged fifty-nine. His 
works were collected and arranged by Li Zhiquan (1191-1261), who at that 

time was helping the celebrated Quanzhen leader Song Defang (1183-1247) with 
the compilation of the 1244 canon (see 073 Ganshui xianyuan lu 8.1). The first juan 
collects the master’s regular verses (seventy-one quatrains and four octaves). The sec- 
ond is made of fifty-six lyrics (ci IS] ) for twenty-seven tunes, fifteen of which are also 
used in 247 Huichenji; the first tune used is “Manting fang ,” a favorite among 

Quanzhen masters. The third juan contains thirteen essays (zhang IfS ) that obscurely 
describe the progression of the neidan process. They are followed by the obituary 

notice and a few eulogies. The dedicatees are all unknown locals, but we may note two 
“association members” (huishou ) and a Confiician teacher. Place names point to 
Shaanxi and Shanxi provinces. 

Although he never uses the term quanzhen, Liu quotes Qiu Chuji (3.4a) and 
Ma Danyang along with Bo Yuchan (3.7a). He seems little involved in the insti- 
tutional and liturgical aspects of religion. His instructions are less didactic than other 
Quanzhen writings, touching on many techniques without apparent system. 

Vincent Goossaert 



Shuiyun ji TRUffe 

3 juan 

By Tan Chuduan WlMffln, hao Changzhen zi MSUs 1229 

1160 (fasc. 798) 

“Water and Clouds.” This literary collection contains lyrical works of different 
genres, which the author, a native of Mount Kunyu Mfe (Shandong), composed 
after 1170 in Shaanxi. Tan Chuduan preached his Quanzhen teachings in Shaanxi. 
Originally Wang Liuhui HffiM had this collection printed in Junzhou (t'j'l'l, but in 
1186 the printing blocks were lost. In Shandong, Liu Chuxuan arranged for new 
printing blocks to be cut (see the preface by Fan Yi IeI?, dated 1187). Because of 
the impact of military actions in the area, there soon was no complete edition avail- 
able. Later, Lu Qian’gao r® and others found a complete edition, which had 
been owned by disciples of Tan Chuduan. That edition was then reprinted, and a 
postface by a son of Fan Yi attached to it (3.i8b-i9a). A second edition of this printed 
version was issued in 1229 due to the efforts of the Quanzhen Taoist Zhang Zhiquan 
<jg §?: (see the second postface by the son of Fan Yi, dated 1229, 3.i9b-2oa). 

The expression “Water and Clouds” refers to Tan Chuduan’s admonition to his 
disciples to discard all emotional and social bonds and lead the way of life known as 
Quanzhen. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Hachiya Kunio, “Dan Choshin no shogai to shiso.” 

Florian C. Reiter 

3.B.9.C Rules and Organization 

Although less important than poetry, recorded sayings, and hagiography, didactic 
works also feature in Quanzhen literature. Several masters wrote commentaries on the 
classics, such as the Laozi and Zhuangzi ®Jor major scriptures of the Lingbao 

Hf jf tradition. Examples are 122 Huangdi Yinfu jing zhu and 401 Huangting neijing 
yujing zhu , both by the patriarch Liu Chuxuan; 974 Taishang laojun shuo chang 
qingjing jing songzhu by LiuTongwei (d. 1196); and 313 Shengtian jing songjie 

by Wang Jichang. On the other hand, no liturgical work is ascribed to a Quanzhen 
author, a surprising fact given the dominant place of ritual activities for Quanzhen 
masters in North China over a long period of time. Chapter 210 of the ritual compen- 
dium 1220 Daofa huiyuan is a stand-alone liandu Mix ritual compiled in the late Yuan 
(1279-1368) by a “Quanzhen daoshi” (postface dated 1354), but the connection with 
Quanzhen doctrine and practice seems tenuous. All in all, it is likely that the conserva- 
tive outlook of the Quanzhen order pushed the daoshi to use established scriptural 




[ u68 ] 3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order 



3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1169 ] 



traditions rather than create a new one. An analysis of the ordination registers men- 
tioned in Quanzhen historiography suggest that they had by the mid-thirteenth cen- 
tury incorporated all the major current liturgical traditions. The didactic works other 
than commentaries authored by Quanzhen masters can be grouped into two unequal 
categories: (1) rules and organizations and (2) individual practice. The first category 
only accounts for three texts, a trifle compared to the amount of Vinaya literature in 
the Buddhist canon. This paucity of material in the canon may come as a surprise, since 
the real innovation of the Quanzhen school lay in its creation of a monastic order with 
very specific institutions and a strong hierarchy. The organization is actually docu- 
mented in much more detail in the epigraphic sources. Of the three canonical texts, 
the 123s Quanzhen qinggui is a compendium of short rules attributed to the patriarchs; 
it may have been used as a model collection for monasteries to design their own rules. 
The 1229 Quanzhen zuobojiefa is a technical manual explaining the use of the sinking 
clepsydra, a device used for collective meditation in Taoist monasteries from the last 
decade of the thirteenth century onward. The 1233 Chongyang lijiao shiwu lun , although 
often translated and quoted in the secondary literature, is simply a short programmatic 
description of the Quanzhen lifestyle of uncertain date and authorship. 

The majority of the didactic works are concerned with individual practice. It should 
be noted that none was written during the early stage of the Quanzhen order. Al- 
though early masters such as Hao Datong, and later ones such as Wang Jichang ( 247 
Huizhenji ), Liu Zhiyuan (248 Qizhenji), or Ji Zhizhen ( 1140 Tunshanji) wrote theo- 
retical essays (included in their anthologies), one has to wait until the late thirteenth 
century to see the appearance of complete prose works devoted to self-cultivation, spe- 
cifically Inner Alchemy (neidan these works are 276Xiyi zhimi lun , still half-way 

between logia and treatise and 267 Shangsheng xiuzhen sanyao. All the others texts were 
authored by masters from southern China, who were affiliated with Quanzhen but 
mostly heir to the Nanzong pedagogy. Their syncretic approach was to become the 
Taoist orthodoxy of the late imperial period. Li Daochun, who taught in Nanking, 
and his disciple Miao Shanshi (g If B(f , as well as Chen Zhixu seem to have been 
independent masters, whereas Wang Jie (mid-fourteenth century) and Jin Zhiyang 
(1276-1336), the supposed master of the famous painter Huang Gongwang If 
if If (1269-1354), were very close to Zhengyi circles. These authors wrote theoretical 
neidan essays and poetry as well as commentaries on the Taoist classics. Li’s works are 
249 Zhongheji , 250 Santian yisui, 2si Quanzhen ji xuan biyao, and 1060 Qing’an Ting chan 
zi yulu. His disciple Miao Shanshi authored 106s Xuanjiao da gong an as well as the 
hagiographic work 30s Chunyang dijun shenhuamiaotongji. Chen Zhixu composed 
1067 Shangyang zijindan dayao and its sequels 1068 Jindan dayao tu, 1069 Jindan dayao 
liexian zi, 1070 Jindan dayao xianpai; the anonymous io77Xiulian xuzhi belongs to the 



same milieu. Wang Jie wrot e 137 Qingtiange zhushi, i074Huanzhenji, and 107s Dao- 
xuan pian. Huang Gongwang wrote or transmitted 242 Zhichou xiansheng quanzhen 
zhizhi, 281 Baoyi zi sanfeng laoren danjue , and s 76 Baoyi hansan bijue. 

The central importance of neidan in Quanzhen identity makes the absence of early 
Quanzhen patriarchs in this realm even more surprising. Although n s6 Chongyang 
zhenren jinguan yusuo jue and 244 Dadan zhizhi are systematic texts on neidan at- 
tributed to Wang Zhe and Qiu Chuji, respectively, these attributions are highly 
doubtful. The explanation for this lack of purely Quanzhen reference work is likely 
the same as for liturgy: Quanzhen masters were happy to use the classics at their 
disposal. Although detailed information on the Quanzhen curriculum is lacking, it 
seems that classics ( Daodejing , Qingjing jing, Tinfujing, and others), along with major 
neidan writings (Zhang Boduan’s in particular), were often used. Buddhist and 
Confucian classics were also taught to adepts: Wang Zhe’s oft-quoted advice to 
study the Daode jing Jill If, Xiao jing , and the Heart sutra is a case in point. 
Indeed, Quanzhen writings are rarely polemical. One of Qiu Chuji’s most promi- 
nent disciples, Feng Zhiheng jf§ ig? (1180-1254), instructed his disciples in the Four 
Books, and was probably one of the earliest of Zhu Xi’s (1130-1200) followers in 
northern China. Feng even directed the academy of the Confucius temple in Peking, 
providing a model for the nonsectarian educational role of the Quanzhen. 

Quanzhen zuobo jiefa ^ §& fit ?£ 

4 fols. 

Yuan (1279-1368) 

1229 (fasc. 988) 

“Practical Method of Meditation Using the Clepsydra.” The clepsydra was used in 
cloisters of the Quanzhen school to measure the time of sessions of meditation. On 
the context of Quanzhen monasticism, especially during the Yuan period, see also 123s 
Quanzhen qinggui 5a-b. 

The present work describes the clepsydra, the principles of its construction, and its 
use. It concludes with precise instructions for the handling and appropriate setting 
of the clepsydra in combination with the calendar. On page 4a, the text gives a chart 
representing the cosmic phases according to which the envisaged meditation should 
be practiced. The two sentences that express the guiding principles are taken from the 
Tinfu jing “To observe the Tao of Heaven,” and “To behold the Movements 

of Heaven” (see 31 Huangdi yinfu jing ia). 

Florian C. Reiter 




[ ii 70 ] 3. B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



Chongyang lijiao shiwu lun fi | 9 § \L + E 

6 fols. 

By Wang Zhe HH, hao Chongyang zi (1113-1170) 

1233 (fasc. 989) 

“Fifteen Lessons for the Establishment of the Doctrine.” This work comprises short 
essays on the basic tenets of the Quanzhen school. The fifteen titles are “Living in Re- 
treat” (ia), “Wandering” (ia-b), “Learning from Books” (ib-2a), “Proper Blending of 
Medicines” (2a-b), “On Dwelling” (2b-3a), “Spiritual Companionship” (3a), “Active 
Meditation” (3b), “Disciplining the Mind” (3b-4a), “To Nurture One’s Being” (4a), 
“Matching the Five Vital Energies” (4b), “Union of Being and Existence” (4b), “Way 
of the Sages” (5a), “Escaping the Three Realms” (ja-b), “Body of the Law” (5b), and 
“Leaving the World of Men” (sb-6a). Each of these texts discusses an aspect of self- 
cultivation or the Quanzhen way of life. A poem by Ma Dan yang in 1149 Dongxuan 
jinyuji 2.i3a-i3b shows that Ma knew an exposition by Wang Zhe concerning the 
theme of “Wandering” and indeed imitates the structure and the contents of that essay 
in the present work. The “Fifteen Lessons” has been widely studied and repeatedly 
translated as a manifesto of Quanzhen teaching (see the bibliographical references 
below). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ishii Masako, Dokyd gaku no kenkyu, 13-17; Reiter, “Ch’ung-yang sets forth his teachings”; 
Sommer, Chinese religion , 199-203; Yao Tao-chung, “Ch’iian-chen.” 

Florian C. Reiter 

Quanzhen qinggui R fff 

16 fols. 

Compiled by Lu Daohe |H iM f P , hao Tongxuan zi S ; fourteenth century 

1235 (fasc. 989) 

“Pure Rules of the Quanzhen School.” This title consists of a collection of twelve 
texts on the conditions of celibate fife in a cloister. The work begins with the admission 
of youths to the community (inquiries into family background; ia-2b), their investi- 
ture as Taoists, and the search for an appropriate master (2b-4b). The author describes 
the rules for maintaining order within the monastic community (e.g., compliance with 
the laws of the country; 12a) and stipulates the need for well-organized meditation 
sessions in which the entire community participates. The texts on pages iib-i6a are 
attributed to Wang Chongyang, Qiu Chuji, Zhao Wuxuan H Iff (1148-1211), 

and Liu Zhenyi (I — . The title of Dijun tfrS for Wang Chongyang points to 

a date after 1310 for the compilation of this work (11b). 

The text documents an advanced phase in the history of the Quanzhen school, 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1171 ] 



which was characterized by well-organized forms of monastic activity (cf. ,22, Qmm- 
zhmzmbcjUfa). Fhn „aR„ur 

3.B.9.d Individual Practice 



Dadan zhizhi K I s } J § 

Attributed to Qiu Chuji JxM, hao Changchun ; early Yuan (1279-1368) 

244 (fasc. 115) . , 

“Clear Directions on the Great Elixir.” This is a neidan ft# (see fig. 63.) work 

attributed to the Quanzhen patriarch Qiu Chuji (cf. ns 9 Pmxtjt). The techniques 
described in the text are based on the theory and methods of 1191 Bichuan Zhengyang 
zhenren lingbao bifa and z46Xishan qunxian huizhenji. The former divides its proce- 
dure into ten steps, as does the present text, with some differences m headings and 

° r< Our work quotes Shi Jianwu at length, but a comparison with utXishan qunx- 
ian hui zhenji shows that it is not exactly the same text (cf., e.g., i.nb, 4-+a, 9b, 1.12a, 
and 5.6a with 1. 6a, 8a, and 12a of our text). The passage on the ten demonic manifesta- 
tions (2.2a-6b) is an excerpt from 263.14 Zhong-Lu chuandao 
ji (263 Xiuzhen shishu i6.2 5 a-26a). Qiu Chuji appends his 

® own explanations to these techniques, which he illustrates 
with diagrams. 

In his preface (ia- 3 a), Qiu explains the working of the 
macrocosm and the microcosm: the qi of the Great Void Jk 
7$^ — ■ JjK , having reached extreme stillness, gave rise to move 

® fi\l ment, separated into yin and yang, and formed Heaven and 
| Ff Earth. But the qi, having once acquired mouon, could not 

]$) remain still, hence the qi of yin and yang began their cyclical 

1 rotation. The alternation of yin and yang, sun and moon, day 

® and night is made possible through a central axis (zhongqt 
■t'fi), which resides in the handle of the Dipper (ia-b). 
The embryo develops similarly; after birth, the Primordial 
Qi ( yuanqi liM.) is found in the center, that is, the navel. 
Through breathing exercises, this center is activated, lead- 
FIGU re 63. Essence, tQ ^ unhampere d natural circulation of the body fluids. 

Energy, Spirit: The rf these exercises, the adept acquires 

three elements of Inner nuuug.i li v 

Alchemy [244 2.13a) long life and eventually sainthood. 



Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 




[ 1172 ] 3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order 



3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1173 ] 



Baoyi hansan bijue ]&- ' ® 

28 fols. 

Compiled by Jin Yueyan Ijz Lj , transmitted by Huang Gongwang fif {b: M 

(1269-1354) 

576 (fasc. 321) 

“Secret Instructions on Holding the One and Encasing the Three.” This work is a 
pedagogical neidan ft ft manual of the late Yuan period (1279-1368) and contains no 
internal indication of authorship. However, the term baoyi in the tide might refer to 
the Liu xiansheng jfcft of 281 Baoyi zi sanfeng laoren danjue , and the text is rather 
consistant with both that work and 242 Zhizhou xiansheng quanzhen zhizhi. 

The text is divided into some fifteen explanations ( ming ft[), treatises ( lun f$f), 
and discourses ( sbuo M), most of them accompanied by a chart, like the sketch of a 
meditation room on 25b. Each section begins with the inception of the embryo and 
ends with its divine apotheosis, offering detailed explanations on physiology and time 
cycles. Some parts are written in dialogue style ( 5 b). The need for oral instructions 
( koujue P tfe ) is repeatedly indicated. 

Vincent Goossaert 

Baoyi zi sanfeng laoren danjue Jfe— ftft ft 

18 fols. 

Compiled by Jin Yueyan $g, transmitted by Huang Gongwang M&M 

(1269-1354) 

281 (fasc. 134) 

“Alchemical Instructions of the Old Man Three Peaks, the Master Holding the 
One. This work raises problems of identification, both with regard to the compiler 
and the author (see 242 Zhizhou xiansheng quanzhen zhizhi). The work is attributed 
to a Liu xiansheng bearing the appelation “Old Man Three Peaks, Master 

Holding the One, but it is not clear if he is a historical figure. 

The first lines list the contents of the work, which are Liu’s Oral Instructions on 
the Celestial Immortals’ Chart (“Tianxian tu koujue ft«P R”), Oral Instructions 
on False Xingming (“Jia xingming koujue fgftiftPgft’), Oral Instructions on True 
Xingming (“Zhen xingming koujue Rftffr Pa*”), and sixteen poems on the lowest 
pass of the spine (“weilii xue Hfelft”). The text then proceeds with an introduction 
(ia-6b). Its general tone is comparable to that of 242 Quanzhen zhizhi , being quite 
polemical against heterodox practices. The term quanzhen is absent here. 

The work does not in fact follow this precis exactly. The first section comprises 
oral instructions on both the false xingming (6b-9a), the small achievement of those 
who fix their mind only on the lower dantian ft ffl (which should be practiced only 



initially; see 13a), and the true xingming fta-isa), the great achievement of those who 
effect the reversal of the true yin and yang to have them circulate throughout the body. 
The “celestial immortals’ chart” (i5a-i6b) is actually composed of four trigrams. The 
chart of the weilii MfMl and its accompanying sixteen poems come last (i6b-i8b). All 
textual references are to Quanzhen patriarchs (Zhongli Quan, Lti Dongbin, 
Liu Haichan, Wang Chongyang, and Song Defang), but the idea that the 
state of zhenren can be attained in three hundred days (like gestation; see ija-b) is 
uncommon in Quanzhen texts. This method seems to be intended solely for male 
adepts. The term sanfeng EL (Three Peaks) sometimes refers to sexual techniques in 
other contexts, mosdy in later works like the Sanfeng caizhan fangzhong miaoshu bijue 

in the Shesheng zongyao jj£ ft fl (Ming [1368-1644]) and 
the Sanfeng danjue Hll#ftl& in the Zhengdao bishu (Qing [1644-1911]). 

But that is probably not the case here. 

Vincent Goossaert 

Tuanshi tianzun shuo dedao liaoshenjing $ iSifUJlt T If!? 

4 fols. 

25 (fasc. 27) 

“Pronouncement of the Heavenly Worthy of the Primordial Beginning on Obtain- 
ing the Tao and Understanding the Body.” Despite the title, the rhythm of this text 
suggests that it was not likely used for recitation. At the beginning, the Heavenly 
Worthy illustrates (xian iM) the Tao and discourses upon the Tao of Complete Truth 
(, quanzhen dadao ^ lH ft jjf ). Then, after incorporating the first sentence of 24 Tuan- 
shi tianzun shuo shengtian dedao jing, the text says that the Heavenly Worthy “pro- 
nounced” the Shengtian dedao quanzhen liaoshenjing. 

An explanation of the Quanzhen Way follows. This explanation begins precisely 
with “the ban of the mouth” ( jinkou P ). When “the heart has been washed clean” 

of all thoughts and when “one has forgotten the environment” the practice of the 
circulation of the qi is recommended. This will lead to the “exhaustion of the yin, the 
purification of the yang, and the formation of the saint’s embryo” (2a). Thus, the ad- 
ept unites with Spontaneous Emptiness, that is, with the True One of the Primordial 
Beginning (Yuanshi zhenyi -), who is the adept’s “real body.” The remainder 

of the text explains this process in greater detail, using alchemical terminology. One 
learns, in particular, that “to understand the body” means to understand how to com- 
bine nature, xing ft (mercury, produced by wood and fire, which is linked to expira- 
tion and heart) and life, ming ft (lead, produced by metal and water, which is linked 
to inspiration and kidneys). 

John Lagerwey 




[ U 74 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



Qingtiange zhushi W ^ §i ^ 

8 fols. 

Commentary by Wang Jie 3 E 3 ft (fl. 1331-1380) 

137 (fasc. 60) 

“Glosses on Song of the Azure Sky'.' This text is also found in Qiu Chuji’s collected 
works (see ns9 Panxiji 3.ia-b), in an identical version. According to Wang Jie’s pref- 
ace, Qiu wrote this song in thirty-two verses with reference to the Thirty-two Heavens 
of 1 Lingbao wuliang duren shangpin miaojing. 

Wang Jie divides the song in three parts, with eight verses on innate nature (xing 
14 ), eight on vitality (mingao), and eight on the fusion of xing and ming that enables 
tire spirit (shen ) of the adept to be delivered from the body. His commentary draws 
on sources of the Three Teachings. For Taoism, he uses principally 1 Duren jing. 

The text of the “Song of the Azure Sky” was engraved on stone in 1273. 

Catherine Despeux 

Zhongheji 

6 juan 

By Li Daochun (A- 1288-1306); edited by Cai Zhiyi zi Sun’an 

fHli, hao Baochan zi (late thirteenth century); preface by Du Daojian 

(1237-1318); printed in 1306 

249 (fasc. 118) 

“Collection of Central Harmony.” According to the preface written in 1306 by Du 
Daojian, Cai Zhiyi of Weiyang (Yangzhou), disciple of Li Daochun, collected 
the fragmented manuscripts of his master and edited them into the present collec- 
tion. It is named after Li Daochun’s meditation room, the Hermitage of Central 
Harmony (Zhonghe jingshe 4 1 f 0 >fii # ) in Nanking (see 4-iia). Du Daoqian had the 
work printed in 1306. His preface was written in the Xuanyuan zhenguan ^TClJttE? 
temple at Qiantang MilB (Hangzhou). 

An earlier edition of the work, dating from Yuan (1279-1368) times, is mentioned 
in Bisong lou cemgshu zhi 66.29a under the title Qing’an xiansheng zhonghe [ji] 

[ 1 H] in six juan, divided into two parts (qianji fff #| and houji t£H). A copy 
of this edition is preserved in the Seikado bunko (see Seikado bunko, Seikado bunko 
kanseki bunrui mokuroku, 612). 

After an explanation of the Taiji and the Taiji tu icjsft [#] of Zhou Dunyi jS| 

ifcCSt (1017-1073), the work is mainly composed of regular and ci |S] -poetry, songs, 
short prose texts, and dialogues between master and disciples. The subjects concern 
spiritual exercises, alchemy, and so on. The author refers to the Quanzhen school, and 
he gives a definition of its name (3.28b). The second juan is devoted to Inner Alchemy. 
It contains numerous illustrations and diagrams concerning the ingredients, the fiir- 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ II7S ] 



nace, the three fundamental stages of the alchemical process, fire-phasing, the inner 
and outer remedies. The author lists nine heretical schools of alchemy and explains 
the different techniques associated with the technical terms used by those schools. 
Above these schools there are the Three Superior Vehicles (in ascending order) and 
the Supreme Vehicle, which corresponds to the stage in which Li Daochun situates 
himself (2.i2b-i7a). 

Catherine Despeux 

Santian yisui H fz H HSl 

12 fols. 

By Li Daochun (d. 1306); revised by Wang Jie hao Hunran zi 

UM? (A- mid-fourteenth century) 

250 (fasc. 119) 

“Quintessence of the Changes of the Three Heavens. The author mentions this 
work in his preface, dated 1290, to 699 Daode huiyuan. The Santian yisui must conse- 
quently be earlier than that date. 

The title comprises three distinct texts. To begin with, there is an alchemical trea- 
tise, which is again subdivided into two parts. The first part is a collection of sayings 
from the Book of Changes ( Zhouyi In 1 4 zr ) with a rhymed commentary. This part 
deals, according to the sayings, with what the Confucians call the Great Ultimate 
(Taiji ^S). The second part of the treatise lists the nine phases of transformation, 
also with a rhymed commentary. The text adds: “This is what Taoists call cinnabar 
[danfjj? 

The two other texts are (1) a commentary to the Xinjing ufS (The Hrdaya-sutra 
or Sutra of the Heart of Prajna-paramita H:£ ^ 'L'fS), which Li Daochun 

wrote at the request of his disciple Ji’an and (2) a commentary to 31 Huangdi 

yinfujing. 

Catherine Despeux 

Quanzhen ji xuan biyao ^ R jjl Vli §! 

18 fols. 

By Li Daochun $ jjtftfc, hao Qing’an jf ^ (d. 1306) 

251 (fasc. 119) 

“Secret Principles of the Collected Quanzhen Writings.” There are two parts to this 
work. The first (ia-6a) is a commentary to one of the sections of the Wuzhenpian f§ 
(j| U called While Reading the Cantong qi (“Zhudu Zhouyi cantong qi |± § 1 M J?r # IrI 
173 ”- see 141 Ziyang zhenren Wuzhenpian zhushu , 8.1 and 14s Wuzhen pian zhushi 3 - 3 ^)- 
According to Li Daochun, this text concerns the principles of the art of fire-phas- 
ing ( huohou J X{&). The second part (6a-i8b) is a commentary on the “Explications 



[ 1176 ] 3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order 



I 



on the Diagram of the Great Ultimate” (Taiji tujie A|»IISIj§¥) by Zhou Dunyi JI||& 

£31 (1017-1073)- 

The author draws on different sources, such as the Book of Changes (Tijing H 
If), the Laozi ^ “F, the Neo-Confucian thinkers Zhou Dunyi and Shao Yong, the 
Wuzhen pian, and the Cantong qi #[□]§?. 

Catherine Despeux 



Shangsheng xiuzhen sanyao _L M fltf (R H ^ 

2 juan 

By Gao Daokuan [niilf 1 §[, hao Yuanming laoren H| 0 f] A A (1195-1277) 

267 (fasc. 132) 

“Three Essentials for the Cultivation of the True according to the Superior Vehicle.” 
The author, a hermit on Mount Zhongnan [_L|, was a disciple of the Quanzhen 
patriarchs Ma Danyang and Li Chongxu 

The first juan contains an illustrated didactic poem tided “Sanfa song A A®” 
(Song of the Three Methods), which describes the spiritual discipline of the heart ( xin 
A ) and of fundamental human nature ( xing 14 ) by means of the allegory of the train- 
ing of a horse. The song comprises twelve verses 
in an irregular daoqing xMfW meter of seven- and 
three-character fines with accompanying illustra- 
& tions. In addition, there is a commentary in small 

♦ Ht print, also rhymed and in five-character verses. 

I The metaphor of the training of the horse, 

1*? / current in Quanzhen Taoism, seems to have 

been inspired by the analogous allegory of the 
training of the buffalo of Chan Buddhism in 
four, six, eight, ten, or twelve scenes. We have 
VJkSUA here the sole fully illustrated version of the train- 

J ing of the horse of the mind in the Daozang (see 

Jpg figs. 64 and 65). The ten illustrations of the horse 

training are similar to those of the training of the 
buffalo in ten scenes by the Chan master Puming 
H Bf| (end of the eleventh century). 

The second juan is devoted to the fife force 
& ( ming nr? ). It is composed of twelve sections, 

osl each with its own dde and illustrated by a dia- 

figure 64. Practitioner g ram ’ with one or ci '^ P oems 

preparing to eradicate the Roots of a rhymed formula (jue ). Following the tradi- 
Impermanence (267 1.1b) tion of the Zhouyi cantong qi Jf| 0 [r] ^ (q.v.), 



3 .B .9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1177 ] 




figure 65. Steps in Taming the Horse of the Mind ( 267 i.2a-9a) (continued) 



the author exposes the essential phases of Inner Alchemy: the choice of the cauldron 
and the furnace, fire-phasing, the transmutation of cinnabar, the deliverance of the 
body, the return to the true origin and to nonaction. At the end the Song of the Pure 
Awakening of Heart and Nature (“Chunjue xinxing ge 2.i5a-i6a) de- 

scribes the xing as a white buffalo and the xin as the shepherd. This metaphor may 
be compared to the phrase “the Superior Vehicle of the great buffalo is the method 
of true cultivation and inner refinement” (da niuju shangsheng zhe, xiuzhen neilian zhi 
fa ye A 3 ^±^#, fiR in 27 J Sanji zhiming quanti (9a) by Wang 

Qingsheng. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Despeux, Le chemin de I’eveil. 

Catherine Despeux 



' 



[ 1178 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1179 ] 




figure 65 (continued). Steps in Taming the Horse of the 
Mind ( 267 i.2a-9a) 

Xiyi zhimi /»» f/f Ifc 

16 fols. 

By Niu Daochun Villi'?, hew Shenfeng xiaoyao dashi xfr ill A &]i ; 1299 

276 (fasc. 134) 

“Discussions for Resolving Doubts and Pointing out Errors.” These discussions 
were composed by Niu Daochun, according to his own preface, dated 1296. There is a 
colophon by Liu Daozhen §|lj lit lj| dated 1298, which together with a preface by Wang 
Daoheng J£ii dated 1299, precedes the preface by Niu Daochun. Wang Daoheng 
explains that Niu Daochun continues the (Quanzhen) tradition of Ma Danyang, 
Tan Chuduan, Liu Chuxuan, and Qiu Chuji. 

Niu Daochun answers the questions of his disciple Li Zhiheng who 

inquires about the principles of the Quanzhen school, the “Secrets of the True Tao,” 
the meaning of xingming '[$ or? , and especially the methods of self-cultivation. The 
discussions in the second part of this work (8a ff.) are conducted between two prob- 
ably fictitious persons, Guangmo xiansheng IM (H % A and Zhaoran zi Bp M ~F ■ These 
dialogues deal with definitions of technical terms and practices. They also fist specific 




means of self-cultivation, which Niu Daochun rejects (i2b-i3a). Niu Daochun empha- 
sizes the “sudden enlightenment” and the recovery of the “original face.” However, his 
fundamental attitude seems to be that “actually there is nothing to say and nodiing to 
transmit” (15b). This type of statement is characteristic of the Quanzhen school. 

Floritm C. Reiter 



Xuanjiao da gongan A A A ‘M 
2 juan 

By Miao Shanshi FR H 0 A zi Taisu A ^ , zi Shian (fl. fourteenth century) ; 
edited by Wang Zhidao A/Aiit, zi Cheng’an MME; preface dated 1324 
1065 (fasc. 734) 

“Great Cases in the Teaching of Mystery.” This book is composed of sixty-four para- 
graphs called “rules” (ze []([) in harmony with the hexagrams of the Tijing MM (see 
prefaces, ib and 5b), and three additional paragraphs on the “three poles” ( sanji HI®), 
which contain the quintessence of the Teaching. Wang Zhidao was a disciple of Miao 
Shanshi. In addition to Wang’s preface, there are three others: one by Ke Daochong 
hew Yuanhei daoren $3 ® M A ; one by Tang Daolin 10 it , hew Jiuqu yimin 

fl [ft ill Js; , who apparendy had the work printed; and one by Wang Congyi 3E H , 
investigating censor of the Branch Censorate (Xingtai jiancha yushi ff l m ^ '0 )• 
Miao Shanshi was a disciple of Li Daochun . At his master’s temple, the Zhonghe 
jingshe A f II A in Nanking, he occupied the function of zhitang jWsi (see 1060 
Qing’cm Tingchan ziyulu 3.1a). According to the preface by Wang Congyi (3b-4a), 
he wrote supplementary notes in order to complement the Tizhuan MM, the great 
commentary on the Tijing by Cheng Yi fMfSI (1033-1107), as well as a Tiwang jiehuo 

Each paragraph is composed of quotations of different Taoist scriptures, such as the 
Daodejing jjftfilS, the Wenshi fCfu, the Liezi ^J-p, the Zhuangzi H , the Tijing 

MM, or of sayings of great Taoists such as Lti Yan, Wang Zhi, Bo Yuchan, and 
the three Mao brothers. These texts are followed by judgments and interpretations as 
to the true meaning of those texts (see prefaces, 5b), hence the tide “Great [Judicial] 
Cases.” At the end of each case, there is a hymn ( song 21 ). 

Catherine Despeux 



Shangyang zi jindan dayao _h PH ^ EJ A H 
16 juan 

By Chen Zhixu W^L)M.,zi Guanwu 1 §, hew Shangyang zi JiHHH; ca. 1331 
1067 (fasc. 736-738) 

“Master Shangyang’s Essentials of the Elixir.” This work includes an introduction 
(2.ia-7b) by Chen Zhixu (dated 1331) and two prefaces written by his disciples (ca. 
1335). The text must therefore have been compiled between these two dates. 




[ u8o ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1181 ] 



Chen Zhixu, a Taoist of the Zixiao jiang gong 'flr H temple, lived in the 
Hunan and Hubei region: he met his master in Hengyang ftj |i§ (Hunan), and in the 
course of his peregrinations gathered many disciples in the Jiugong shan |Ij, 
mountains in Hubei (ii.8a, 12.1a). Chen belonged to an offshoot of the Quanzhen 
school tracing its lineage to Ma Danyang (12.5b, 14.8b; see also 1069 Shangyang zi 
jindan dayao liexian zhi 7a-9a). Although Chen Zhixu claims to adhere to the syn- 
cretist movement uniting the Three Teachings (sanjiao weiyi — •; see especially 

14.3b ff), Taoist and Chan teachings predominate. On the Taoist side, he is strongly 
influenced by Zhang Boduan and Bo Yuchan. Chen Zhixu was familiar with 
most of the texts in 263 Xiuzhen shishu, as is evident from his quotations (see, e.g., the 
quotation from the Wuzben pitm ffj R H in 5.9a). 

On the Buddhist side, he gready admired the teachings of the master Nanquan 
^ (748-834) and his disciple Zhaozhou Hj'H (777-896). Chen’s work alludes 
throughout to Chan gongan !§ riddles (see especially 15.6a ff. and 16.4b ff). Also of 

interest is his frequent use of Chan technical terms, such as jianxing cheng fo 
{$} (14.13a, 16. ia), that is, the attainment of buddhahood upon beholding the buddha- 
nature within oneself. Among the standard Buddhist sutra, the Diamond Sutra, the 
scripture most revered by the Sixth Patriarch Huineng of the Southern school 
of Chan, is most frequendy quoted in the text. 

Chen Zhixu’s work represents a harmonious concord between xing '[4 (Chan) 
and ming a\i (Taoism). The entire work is theoretical, cryptic, and allusive— as Chen 
himself says, the text alone, without indications from a master, was of no use (5.9b). 
The elixir jindan is for him the ineffable, all-embracing, immanent, and tran- 

scendental qi of “Former Heaven” (1.4a; 5.ib-2a). Chen Zhixu nevertheless, in 
keeping with the Wuzhen pian tradition, shows a close familiarity with alchemical 
terminology that may be applied to both neidan F*3 jf and waidan (see juan 
5-8). The way to attain the elixir consists first in acquiring a thorough understanding 
of social rules, then in meditation resulting in wisdom (2.7a). 

Juan 1 of this text is in fact the introduction to the work (cf. the Daozang jinghua 
edition, where it is featured separately as a preface). According to this introduction 
(i.na-nb), the composition of the Jindan dayao is as follows: 

1. “Xuwu lM M ,” three zhang 

2. “Shangyao _h H one zhang 

3. “Miaoyong ” nine zhang (only seven zhang in the present text; for the 
missing two, cf. the Daozang jinghua edition) 

4. “Xuzhi seven zhang 

5. “Jigong shige 

6. “Leixing Hfr” 



7. “Fazhen wenda R [ 3 ] 

8. “Xiuzhen tu xiang fFt> [Pt [S[ ” 

9. “Yuege nigu S’” 

10. “Chaozong ISzk” 

The entire work should comprise ten juan, but the present version follows a differ- 
ent division. 

Juan 2, titled “Void,” comprises a preface and commentary on the first section of 
the Daodejing jit '{% . 

Juan 3 and 4, titled the “True Medicine” include a discussion of preserving the 
original jing iff (essence), qi m and shen (spirits, divinities), also called the “png, 
qi, shen existing before the formation of Heaven and Earth” (3.1a). 

Juan 5 and 6 comprise seven of the nine discussions on the “subtle” use of certain 
ingredients ( miaoyong %}) ). These deal with the elixir jindan, ingredients, alchemical 

vessels, the best moment for collecting the ingredients, the true catalyst ( zhentu [JJ i), 
fire-phasing, and divine transformation. The Daozang jinghua edition includes the last 
two discussions concerning huandan j§ fj (cyclically transformed elixir) and diandao 
ggflj (reversal of the natural order). 

Juan 7 and 8 offer additional explanations of alchemical terms, from fire-phasing 
to transfiguration. These are entitled “Requisite Knowledge.” The additional explana- 
tions mainly concern the problem of transmission. Chen advocates the Chan idea of 
xinshou (mental transmission, which enables the adept to behold the buddha- 
nature within himself intuitively; 8.3b— 5b). 

The juan that follows (9), under the heading “Accumulation of Merit,” consists of 
a collection of poems. 

Juan 10 comprises eighty-one couplets on the Daodejing. 

Juan 11 and 12 are entitled “Accumulation of Pious Acts” (“Leixing Mff ”) and are 
epistles addressed to the author’s disciples. This section is incomplete (cf. the Daozang 
jiyao edition). 

Juan 13 and 14 are entitled “Fazhen # (J|” (from a term meaning to manifest the 
truth or exhibit the innate buddha-nature). Both are in the form of “recorded conver- 
sations” ( yulu loll) and concern universal problems such as life, death, the origin of 
the universe, realization of one’s innate buddha-nature, and others. 

The titles of the last two juan (15 and 16), “Yuege and “Chaozong Mfsj are 
taken from a Buddhist expression meaning to surpass the origin of the great dharma 
and go beyond rules and norms. Juan 15 examines gongan |j| riddles. Juan 16 is an 
exposition concerning the phrase “to attain buddhahood upon beholding ones own 
innate nature” ( jianxing cheng fo 



Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 



[ iiS2 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1183 ] 




figure 66. The progressive and regressive dynamics of the Great Ultimate and 
the materialization of the Primordial Qi as a landscape ( 1068 3 a). Ming reprint of 
1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1054) 




figure 67. Dragon and tiger as alchemical symbols ( 1068 8 a). Ming reprint of 
1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1054) 



Shangyang zi jindan day no tu 
12 fols. 

By Chen Zhixu I Guanwu M^,hao Shangyangzi _h$§-p; ca. 1331 
1068 (fasc. 738) 

“Alchemical Diagrams to Master Shangyang’s Essentials of the Elixir.” This collec- 
tion is in fact juan 8 of the Jindan dayao dzfddvl?, where it appears under the heading 
“Xiuzhen tuxiang \\% MMM” (see 1067 Shangyang zi jindan dayao 1.11b). The diagrams 
depict various symbols and utensils used in alchemy, both neidan fd and waidan (/f 
: Taiji, Five Elements, Eight Trigrams, as well as the phases of the moon, dragon, 
tiger, cauldron, furnace, and others. (See figs. 66 and 67.) 

Some of the diagrams were copied from other works; see, for instance, 263 Xiuzhen 
shishu 1.1a, 26.5a-b, and 1003 Zhouyi cantong qi dingqige mingjing tu 8a-b for the dia- 
grams on 7b, 8a, and 10b of the present text. The sequence of the diagrams is slightly 
different in the Daozang jiyao edition. 



Shangyang zi jindan dayao liexian zhi _h PH -f" sfe fd "A H fill Id 

9 fols. 

By Chen Zhixu zi Guanwu SI o', hao Shangyang zi _hWb~P ; ca. 1331 

1069 (fasc. 738) 

“Record of Famous Immortals Pertaining to Master Shangyang’s Essentials of the 
Elixir.” This is a collection of sixteen biographies of Chen Zhixu’s school, starting 
with Wang Xuanfii 3 r.^ and ending with Chen himself. Chen traces the direct 
lineage of his school back to Ma Danyang: from Ma to Song Youdao M , Li 
Jue ^fJE, Zhang Mu Zhao Youqin and finally Chen Zhixu. 

Chen Zhixu received instruction from Zhao Youqin in a year jisi B E (1269 or 
1329) at Hengyang . 

Farzeen Raldrian-Hussein 



Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 





[//&*] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



Shangyang zi jindan dayao xianpai h 1 ^ A LJ A S fill ilR 
io fols. 

By Chen Zhixu Guanwu Siff, hao Shangyang zi _hp§ A; ca. 1331 

1070 (fasc. 738) 

“Lineage Pertaining to Master Shangyang’s Essentials of the Elixir.” This short 
work details the “lineage of the immortals” (. xianpai flljM) of Chen Zhixu’s school 
(ia-2b), and includes as well a description of the ritual ceremony on the occasion of 
Zhongli Quan’s and Lu Dongbin’s birthdays (“Zhong Lii erxian qingdan yi 
Since Lu Dongbin and Zhongli Quan were born on the 
fourteenth and fifteenth days of the fourth month, respectively, the offerings in their 
honor were presented together. 

Farzeen Baldnan-Hussein 

Xiulian xuzhi 
20 fols. 

Yuan (1279-1368) 

1077 (fasc. 740) 

“Essential Knowledge about the Practice [of Inner Alchemy].” This text is a short 
neidan A fl- treatise by an unknown author, although he latter must have belonged 
to the Quanzhen order. He refers to the instructions given by Quanzhen teachers in 
the practice of Inner Alchemy (page 5a) and speaks ofLu Dongbin as the Pure Yang 
Patriarch (Chunyang zushi Ml PM Sffi ), also referring to him as the Imperial Lord 
Pure Yang (Chunyang dijun MPIAfj )• The latter title was granted Lu Dongbin 
in 1310. 

The work draws on a great variety of sources, not only quoting classical Confu- 
cian texts, but also referring to the Taoist activities of Zhu Xi AH (Zhu Huian A 
; 1130-1200). Buddhists scriptures are also drawn upon. Reference to Taoist works 
mosdy concern the Southern school (Nanzong p^A)- Of Bo Yuchan (Ziqing Bo 
zhenren At A) it is said that he met his master Chen Nan (Niwan weng M 

) when he was already sixty-four years old (6a). Among the later masters, special 
reference is made to Li Daochun (Yingchan zi HJSA; ib), Zhao Youqin A 
(Yuandu zi Iff??; fl.1329) and Chen Zhixu (Shangyang zi A Pi A)- Chen is 
quoted more than ten times, and the entire last part of the treatise, the “Seven Steps 
in the Cultivation of True Nature” (Xiuzhen qishi t^P) is entirely his work. The 

present work is therefore likely to belong to his school. 



Kristofer Schipper 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 118s ] 



Chongyang zhenren jinguan yusuo jue S iH A sfe P A fU sfe 

23 fols. 

By Wang Zhe IS, hao Chongyang zi K PJ§ A (1113-1170) 

1156 (fasc. 796) 

“Instructions concerning the Golden Bar and the Jade Lock.” This tide has been 
attributed to Wan G Z h e . The character zhe S used here could point to the years be- 
tween 1159 and 1167, when Wang Zhe was still living in Shaanxi, for the approximate 
date of the compilation of this work (see iiS4 Chongyang jiaohua ji 1.15b). It should 
be noted that the contents and predominant terminology of this work differ gready 
from other writings that can be confidendy attributed to Wang Zhe. Those works, 
however, were written later, when Wang Zhe was preaching in Shandong. 

This work contains didactic dialogues dealing with methods to preserve and sub- 
limate the Three Treasures (essences, breath, blood). The Golden Bar and the Jade 
Lock also represent procedures, “the guiding of the gold-essences up to the brain and 
their fixation in the brain” and “the clenching of the teeth” (6b, 11b). Both procedures 
represent a great number of meditative and physiological methods, which are all said 
to effect self-cultivation. These methods are not introduced or mentioned in other 
works connected with Wang Zhe’s activities in Shandong, where he founded the 
Quanzhen school. Yet some of the tenets set forth here can be regarded as typical of 
his later Quanzhen teachings, for example, concerning the three schools of Buddhism, 
Confucianism, and Taoism. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Hachiya Kunio, “ Choyd shinjin kinkan gyokusa ketsuV 

Florian C. Reiter 

Zhnzhen neidan jiyao INf B fa fj M H 

3 juan 

Compiled by Xuanquan zi AAA, hao Haitian qiuyue daoren jti A IL LI iS A ; 

Yuan (1279-1368) 

1258 (fasc. 999) 

“Collection of Essentials concerning the Inner Alchemy of the Zhenren.” This tide 
was compiled by Xuanquan zi (see also 1256 Zhenxian zhizhiyulu), either after 1264 or 
1274. The date Song Xianchun jiazi AlAi? A A (3.10b) is erroneous. 

This work contains a few short texts concerning neidan self-cultivation attributed 
to the Zhong-Lii school (e.g., i.ib-4b). In most cases, the author is not indicated, and 
the literary sources are never named. The majority of the texts are “songs” or “instruc- 
tions” that can be attributed to the later Quanzhen school, for example, the ‘Twelve 
Sentences with Secret Instructions concerning Fire-phasing in Inner Alchemy” (2.6b- 




[ uS6 ] 3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 



3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order [ 1187 ] 



8a), which this work attributes to Chunyang . The texts ‘True Proofs of the Inner 
Alchemy” (2.9a ff.) and “Discourse on the Eight Joints” (3.10b ff.) are identical. The 
list of terminologies concerning the Gold-Elixir (2.i3a-i4b) clearly documents the 
didactic purpose of this work. 

Florian C. Reiter 

Zhizhou xiansheng quanzhen zhizhi ^ ffjyfc (fe fiiil J§ 

7 fols. 

Compiled by Jin Yueyan Wi, transmitted by Huang Gongwang M hcio 
Dachi AH (1269-1354) 

242 (fasc. 11+) 

“Straightforward Directions on Quanzhen by Master Paper Boat.” This text pur- 
ports to reproduce the teaching of Jin Yueyan, transmitted by Huang Gongwang, 
both heirs to the Quanzhen lineage (si Quanzhen ftt All). Master Jin must be Jin 
Zhiyang (1276-1336), surnamed Pengtou jUgfl, whose biography by Zhang 

Yuchu can be read in 1311 Xianquanji (4.9a-na). Jin, who lived on Mounts Longhu 
bI^ELU (Jiangxi) and Wuyi jit A [Li (Fujian), attained a considerable reputation for 
his mastery of neidan JJ- . 

This identification is from Rao Zongyi, Huang Gongwang. The renowned painter 
Huang Gongwang indeed seems to have been the disciple of Jin Pengtou. How- 
ever, his association with the present work must remain a 
hypothesis since the name Yueyan is absent from all extant 
biographical material concerning Jin Pengtou. The two 
other works similarly ascribed to Jin Yueyan or Jin Pengtou 
(281 Baoyi zi sanfeng laoren danjue and 576 Baoyi hansan bijue) 
do not shed further fight on this question. The identity of 
Master Paper Boat is not known. 

The text is divided into four parts: an introduction 
(ia-2b), followed by a theoretical outline of the Quanzhen 
teachings (2b-3b), a description of the seven phases of 
Truth (3b-4b), and ten practical instructions for meditation 
(5a-7b; fig. 68). The introduction is a eulogy to Quanzhen, 
and a criticism of both secret longevity techniques and pure 
metaphysics. Becoming an immortal is indeed possible, but 
it requires serious individual efforts and accumulation of 
merit. These are standard Quanzhen themes. The theoreti- 
cal outline is merely a symetrical presentation of form (xing 
0) and spirit (shen #), with charts, poems, and prose de- 
velopments. 



The seven phases of Truth (Then [J| ), which are the result of the interaction of 
spirit and form, are each introduced by a small drawing and a quatrain. The final ten 
instructions on meditation are of a more practical nature; they deal with body control 
(instructions 1 to 3) and the supranormal effects of meditation (instructions 4 to 10). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Rao Zongyi, Huang Gongwang. 

Vincent Goossaert 

Taishang laojun net riyong miaojing A -t iZS B 

2 fols. 

645 (fasc. 342) 

‘Taishang Laojun’s Wonderful Scripture for Daily Inner Practice.” This is a short 
work containing rules for the exercises of meditation that are to be practiced every 
day. The rules mainly consist in preserving the spirit (cunshen Jr ) and concentrating 

thought (dingyi /£;§), while shutting out all external thoughts and sensual percep- 
tions. The purity and tranquility that have to be maintained constantly for twenty-four 
hours lead, via Inner Alchemical intermediate stages, to the vision of the intracorpo- 
real region (guan neijing IS ^ ) and from there, after a ninefold cyclical transforma- 

tion, to the preparation of the Great Elixir (dadan A J 5 }-) itself. 

The text, which is probably affiliated with the Quanzhen school (cf. 646 Taishang 
laojun wai riyong miaojing), figures in an abridged and slightly different version en- 
titled Riyongjue 0 in Dong Jinchun’s izs7 Qunxian yaoyu zuanji i.ia-b. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Legge, The sacred books of China. 2:269-72. 

Ursula- Angelika Cedzich 

Taishang laojun wai riyong miaojing A _L ^ 0 $ If. 

1 fol. 

646 (fasc. 342) 

“Taishang Laojun’s Wonderful Scripture for the External Daily Practice.” The title 
of this short work suggests that the compilers of the Daozang saw a direct relation 
between it and 64s Taishang laojun nei riyong miaojing , the “scripture for the inner 
daily practice.” The recommendations for the moral conduct of fife, which are the 
message of this mnemonic poem of forty-seven trisyllabic fines, are obviously meant 
to round off externally the spiritual exercises described in the preceding 64s Nei riyong 
miaojing. 

The text of this poem, which is clearly influenced by the Quanzhen tradition, was 
engraved in stone in 1352 under the title Taishang laojun riyong miaojing and erected 









fit 9? SSL 
A jfi#- 

rijLi? 

figure 68. The Skiff of 
Salvation, for crossing 
to immortality (242 5a) 




[ aSS ] 3.B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult 



3.B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult [ 1189 ] 



by the Mongolian governor of Zhouzhi fg g (Shaanxi), Ding An ^ ^ , at the ancient 
Louguan fg |g temple at Zhongnan shan $£|^|JL| (Jinshi cuibian weike goo ^ ^ S 

zfc M fi® 3-37a-b). The inscription differs from the Daozang version by one omission 
(verse 4) and three minor textual variants. 

Ursula- Angelika Cedzich 



3.B.10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult 

The rationale for the present section is somewhat theoretical, as it does not corre- 
spond to a historically or bibliographically well-defined school. Beidi, the god of the 
North, appears at an early stage as the ruler of the dark regions of death, the lord of 
Fengdu IPfP, the defunct capital of the heroes who founded the kingdom of Zhou, 
and hence the Chinese city of Hades. As the commander of the legions of the souls of 
the dead, Beidi is also a powerful exorcist spirit. The early Shangqing revelations con- 
tain an exorcist rite of Beidi ( Beidi shagui zhi fa in which the demon 

spirit of Tianpeng ^ M. is invoked (see 1016 Zhen’gao io.ioa-nb and 421 Dengzhenyin- 
jue 2.na-i3b). This short text has provided the basis for a number of scriptures, mosdy 
in relation to the Dongyuan j|Bj jjft tradition (see S3 Taishang dongyuan beidi tianpeng 
burning xiaozai shenzhou miaojing) and also some minor rituals. For a distinct class of 
Taoist practice under the aegis of Beidi, we have to turn to the early Song (960-1279) 
work 1237 Sandong xiudao yi, which lists, after the well-known orders of the Taoist orga- 
nization of the Tang period (618-907), an exorcistic order that practiced the Thunder 
magic (leifa ffri) of the Emperor of the North ( Beidi leigong fa 9a). 

The cult of Beidi flourished in modern times. During the Northern Song (960- 
1127), the worship of the Yishen baode zhenjun , a powerful protector 

of the dynasty linked to Beidi and his demon kings, became an officially recognized 
cult, with which the above-mentioned Tianpeng and other spirits were associated. 
The new schools of Tianxin zhengfa 4 ^L'IE?£, Shenxiao $lfr , and Qingwei 7# 
IS, with their Thunder rites, all incorporated these deities and related spirits of the 
realm of Beidi. Under the Ming (1368-1644), the god of the North became the High 
Divine Ancestor of the Dark Heaven, Xuantian shangdi the protector of 

the dynasty (cf. Nikaido Yoshihiro, “Genten jotei no henyu”). The present section 
is therefore far from complete, containing only those scriptures and rites that have 
not already been discussed within the context of the above-mentioned schools. The 
reader is therefore invited to consult the corresponding sections for more extensive 
information. 



Taishang yuanshi tianzun shuo beidi fumo shenzhou miaojing 

10 juan 

Compiled by Ouyang Wen |£|i§f 2 ; Song (960-1279) 

1412 (fasc. 1053-1054) 

“Wondrous Scripture of Divine Incantations for Subduing Demons of the Em- 
peror of the North, Set Forth by Heavenly Worthy of Primordial Beginning.” This 
book is a compilation of exorcistic methods associated with the god Beidi, Emperor 
of the North. A list of texts containing such methods is found in 1237 Sandong xiudao 
yi 8b-9a, where they are said to be practiced by the Taoists of the Great Obscurity of 
the Emperor of the North (Beidi taixuan daoshi The Taoists of this 

group are said to have specialized in exorcising evil influences and averting calamity 
by regulating the demons and spirits of the Six Heavens, that is, Fengdu shan 1|1 fP 
UU , the underworld below the northern sky. They wear the Seals of Fengdu (Fengdu 
yin IPifPfifl) and their books include a Fumojing if !M IS in three juan; a Tianpeng jing 
in ten juan, and a Beidi jinzhou jing 4 L'rfr 2 jf in three juan. 

There can be little doubt that the present book forms part of these practices and ma- 
terials. It includes, for instance, the Twelve Seals of Fengdu (5.2b-5b), the ‘Tianpeng 
zhou jjS/t,” (i.i5b-i7b and passim), and the list of the names of the palaces of the 
Six Heavens (i.i3a-i5a and passim). However, the date of its compilation remains un- 
certain. It is clear that a book with the tide Beidi jing 4 L containing some of the 
material of our text, had already been transmitted during the Tang dynasty (618-907). 
This is borne out by quotations in YJQQ 47.1a and 6a, of which the first is also found 
in the present book (i.i5a-b), and by the “incantation of the Emperor of the North 
for killing demons” ( Beidi shagui zhou 4 ^^ $$$L/£), found both in YJQQ 46.i9a-b 
and 47.6b and in the present book (4.7a). Note also the quotation from a Beidi jing 
concerning the Seals of Fengdu, found in TPYL 676.9b. But the present redaction of 
the material cannot be earlier than the end of the tenth century. It includes a postscript 
that mentions the Four Saints (Sisheng HI?), and gives the name Yisheng MW to 
the divine protector of the Song dynasty (10. 8a; see 128s Tisheng baode zhuan). 

A probable terminus ante quem may be fixed by the reference to a Beidi da fumo 
shenzhou jing in the commentary of 1167 Taishang g any ing pian 

1.4b (dating from around 1233). The work is quoted there as one of the sources for an 
account of the underworld— an account that relies heavily on the notions presented 
in the present book (see, for instance, i.3a-4a). See also the mention in the early Yuan 
dynasty (1279-1368) work 466 Lingbao lingjiao jidu jinshu 320.19a of the Jiuzhenjie fi 
[|| Jt£ and two fu said to be described in the Beidi fumo jing and in fact included in 
the present book (6.5b-7a). It may be noted, finally, that a book in ten juan with the 
title Beidi shenzhou jing and possibly identical with the present work, is listed in the 




[ H 90 ] 3.B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult 

Chongwen zongmu (1042) and mentioned in the Quejing mulu as lost (VDL 95). Recent 
archaeological evidence has been interpreted as suggesting a late Northern or early 
Southern Song date, that is, roughly twelfth century (see Zhang Xunliao, “Jiangxi 
Gao’an chutu”). 

A good deal of the book may well be derived from early Shangqing texts. Thus, for 
instance, some of the key elements are found also in 1317 Dongzhen shangqing kaitian 
santu qixing yidu jing 2.5a-6b, under the heading “Beidi fengdu liugong dusi fa,” and 
in 1016 Zhen’gao io.9b-nb. Both texts include versions of ritual recitation of the names 
of the Six Heavens of Fengdu 15 f|5 A A ^ £ . In the Zhen’gao this incantation is fol- 
lowed by the “Tianpeng zhou.” The passage from the Zhen’gao is quoted in YJQQ 
45-i6a-i8a, where it is stated that the two incantations derive from the Shangqing 
tradition, and that the Zhengyi corpus also includes them. The relationship with the 
Zhengyi tradition is confirmed in the present book by the fact that the transmission 
of a series of fu is described as taking place within the tradition of the Heavenly Mas- 
ters AS5 HT(8.ib; see also 1413 Beidi fumo jing fa jiantan yi on the list of Heavenly 
Masters invited in this ritual). 

The Shangqing _hfif texts quoted by tide include 1336 Shangqing gaoshang miemo 
yudi shenhui yuqing yinshu (1.19b) and 1366 Shangqing tianguan santu jing (1.13a). Both 
texts contain versions of the names of the Six Heavens of Fengdu and appear to be 
the sources for the first version of this incantation in the present book (i.isa-i$a). 
Our book, however, also incorporates a good deal of material from Lingbao MU 
rituals of the Tang or Song dynasties, for instance, 181 Taishang jiuzhen miaojie jinlu 
duming hazui miaojing and 73 Tuanshi tianzun shuo ganlu shengtian shenzhou miaojing , 
which are combined to make up most of juan 6. Note also the occasional references 
to elements of the Dongyuan tradition, for instance the Sanmei jiangjun 
(9.1a), as well as the correspondence between 4.ia-2b and 33 Taishang dongyuan beidi 
tianpeng hunting xiaozai shenzhou miaojing ia-2b. The syncretic character of the book 
is reflected in the series of legends concerning the early practitioners of the tradition 
found in i.i8b-2ob. It begins with Tao Hongjing, continues with Zhang Daoling 
3S;i!§i and Wang Yuan 3E*j|, and ends with Zheng Siyuan % © (Zheng Yin) 
andGE Xuan. 

The book takes the form of a scripture set forth by the supreme deity, in the setting 
of an assembly of the gods before Yuanshi tianzun. Questioned by the Zhenren of 
Wondrous Actions (Miaoxing zhenren 31 A ), the deity describes the topology of 
the northern sky presided over by Beidi, and of the underworld situated below, that is. 
Mount Fengdu with its six palaces governed by the demon kings of the Six Heavens 
(Liutian mowang A A® A)- Further asked about the ways of avoiding the harmful 
influences from this underworld, Yuanshi tianzun orders Beidi to descend with his 
army into the world in order to deal with the matter. As a result, the present book is 



3.B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult [ 1191 ] 

transmitted into the world, and the majority of its methods are presented as the say- 
ings of Beidi. The six harmful effects caused by the demon kings of the Six Heavens 
are described (i.i2a-b), but it is understood that by means of the methods of the book 
these forces can be turned to a protective use (see for instance 10.2a). 

The purpose of the methods is mainly exorcistic and for the benefit of the living, 
from the healing of sickness and protection against the dangers of childbirth to the 
control of insect pests (i.9a-i2a). In addition, a series of elements of the funeral liturgy 
makes up juan 6. It is explained that the incantations of the book should be accom- 
plished as part of larger services, notably comprising the construction of an altar for 
the seven stars of the Dipper ( qiyuan tan -fc 76 i! ) and an Offering (jiaoji Mff) to the 
lords of the stars (see, e.g., i.9b-iob). Descriptions of methods of the jiao (including 
the jiao that accompanies the transmission of this book) are found in juan 9 and 10. 
Note also the ritual framework for the recitation of this scripture, described in two 
separate texts, 1413 Beidi junto jing fa jiantan yi and 1414 Fumo jing tan xieenjiaoyi. 

The present work is in several respects close to the Tianxin zhengfa A A IE A . 
See, for instance, the first version of the ‘Tianpeng zhou AH/£” found in the book, 
in which each four characters of the incantation is associated with a particular deity 
or group of deities (i.i6a-i7b). This interpretation of the spell is also found in 1227 
Taishang zhuguojiumin zongzhen biyao 3.i8b-28b, where the deities are further repre- 
sented by fu. It would appear that the tradition of the present book served as a source 
for the Tianxin zhengfa, and it may be significant that the preface to 366 Shangqing 
tianxin zhengfa ( ia) states that Mount Huagai lj! it [JL( , the place of origin of a part of 
the Tianxin zhengfa, was earlier the site of the appearance into the world of the Fumo 
jing. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Zhang Xunliao, “Jiangxi Gao’an chutu Nan Song Chunxi liunian Xu Yong mu.” 

Poul Andersen 

Beidi fumo jing fa jiantan yiltifi A £t IS fH 

19 fols. 

By Lu Zhongling )U 4 1 ; Ming (1368-1644) ? 

1413 (fasc. 1054) 

“Ritual for the Construction of the Altar [according to the] Method of the Scrip- 
ture for Subduing Demons of the Emperor of the North.” Both this and the following 
ritual ( 1414 Fumo jing tan xieenjiaoyi) belong together with the preceding scripture, 
1412 Taishang yuanshi tianzun shuo beidi fumo shenzhou miaojing. The scripture has a 
postscript entitled “Arcane Instructions for the Recitation of the Scripture” (Songjing 
xuanjue IS Sift), which states that in addition to the rite of Announcement (fa 




[ 1192 ] 3.B.10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult 

wenzi in the early morning and the subsequent optional recitation, the main 

recitation ceremony includes two major rituals: the construction of the altar {jiantan 

fl ), performed after midday and comprising the actual recitation, and the conclud- 
ing presentation of offerings to the deities {shejiao IS; Si), performed in the evening. 

It is clear that the present ritual and the presentation of offerings were created espe- 
cially to fulfill these functions. The two texts are presumably contemporary, and on the 
evidence found in the presentation of offerings, they may be dated as later than 1377. 
Both rituals contain invitations of the divine masters (sa-b and 1414 Jiaoyi ib-2a), open- 
ing with the two zhenren Sun M and Min [SJ, who are referred to as the founders of 
the tradition ( qijiao $ ), and continuing with the Thirtieth Heavenly Master, Zhang 

Jixian (1092-1126). In the offering ritual he is followed by a whole series of 

Heavenly Masters, up to the Forty-second, Zhang Zhengchang ’MJE'Ri (1335— 1 377). 

The present book contains descriptions of many visualization practices used in con- 
nection with the construction of the altar and during the recitation of the Fumo jing 
(10a, ua-b, i5b-i8a). The altar has three levels (sanji tan H$&f8), corresponding to 
the three levels of Heaven, and a special seat is reserved on it for Beidi, who is iden- 
tified as the Patriarch of the Subduing of Demons (Fumo zushi 3a, 11a). 

During his recitation, the priest is seated in the way of Yuanshi tianzun, who lectures 
the host of deities inside the precious pearl, like the Most High upon the Jade Throne 
(yuju jij ; 15a). The whole ceremony of recitation is termed a Retreat {zhai ff ), and 
it includes the announcement of the purpose of the zhai {xuanyi Iff ; 8b). 

Foul Andersen 

Fumo jing tan xieen jiaoyi M IM f® M ® Si fH 

10 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644)? 

1414 (fasc. 1054) 

“Offering Ritual of Thanksgiving, of the Altar for [the Recitation of] the Scripture 
for Subduing Demons.” See 1413 Beidi fumo jing fa jiantan yi. 

Poul Andersen 

Beidi shuo huoluo qiyuan jing t Ttf? 

10 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644)? 

1415 

Qiyuan zhen jueyu quyi bijing 

5 fols. 

1416 



3.B.10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult [ 1193 ] 

Qjyuan xuanji zhaomo pinjing 1 7 C 3 !f |8 Q IS im 

3 fols. 

1417 

Yuanshi shuo du Fengdu jing jt IS Jx IP 

5 fols. 

1418 

Qiyuan zhaomo fu liutian shenzhou jing 

12 fols. 

1419 

Qiyuan zhenren shuo shenzhen lingfu ji ng -fc ft R A IS 1 $ R S If 

9 fols. 

1420 (fasc. 1055) 

These six texts deal with the war waged by the Emperor of the North against the 
demonic forces of Fengdu or the Six Heavens. His strategy, transmitted by the 
Heavenly Worthy in the first year of the mythical Longhan era— a jiawu ft 1 f- year 
{1417 Qiyuan xuanji zhaomo pinjing ib) — and subsequently transmitted to the Heaven- 
ly Master, consists essentially in the use of the spirits of the seven stars of the Big Dip- 
per. These spirits, called the Seven Zhenren, or the Zhenren of the Seven Principles, 
could be summoned by means of fu such as the huoluo fu of the Shangqing _h 

'/|f tradition and then dispatched to drive away the “demon officers” ( guiguan ; 

the term is used in all but 1420 Qiyuan zhenren shuo shenzhen lingfu jing) who cause 
epidemics (cf. 1416 Qiyuan zhen jueyu quyi bijing) and other disorders. 

Reference is frequently made to the establishment of the Altar of the Seven Prin- 
ciples, or of the Northern Bushel ( 141s Beidi shou huolm qiyuan jing 5a; 1418 Yuanshi 
shuo du Fengdu jing 2b; 1419 Qiyuan zhaomo fu liutian shenzhou jing ib; 1420 Lingfu 
jing 5b). At the altar, officiants “Pace the Mainstay” ( bugang f $|8|), recite “divine 
formulas” ( shenzhou j 3 fJ/E), dispatch “red memorials” ( zhuzhang/biao T^ifti^), and 
make offerings (jiaoji/xie SS^Hf). The officiants are known variously as “Taoist mas- 
ter of the Three Caverns,” “Taoist master of the latter days” “male/female officer,” or 
“libationer.” The “Shangqing Taoist,” who lives as a hermit in the mountains, seems 
to form a separate category ( 1420 Lingfu jing ia). The preeminent role accorded to the 
lords and the qi of the Three and the Five (which appear in all but 1420 Lingfu jing) 
confirms the close relationship of these texts to the Heavenly Master movement. 

Yoshioka Yoshitoyo (“Sandb hodo kakai gihanj 52-53) rightly draws attention to the 
similarity between these texts and those in 33s Taishang dongyuan shenzhou jing, but 
since the latter work did not assume its present form before the early ninth century, the 
similarity is hardly a reason for dating these texts to the late Six Dynasties (220-589). 




[ H94 ] 3.B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult 



3.B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult [ im ] 



Yoshioka’s other argument for a Six Dynasties date is even less acceptable, for though 
it is true that the Seven Zhenren appear in ms Dongxuan lingbao sandong fengdao kejie 
yingshi , there is nothing else to link the exorcistic Taoism of these texts to the monastic 
Taoism of that work. 

Other features suggesting a late Tang (618-907) or even a Northern Song (960- 
1127) date are the role of the Emperor of the North himself and the references to 
“destiny-money” ( mingcai apM ; 1416 3a), to “money and horses” (1415 6b; 1418 4a), 
and to the Black Killer, Heisha ® fx ( 1418 3a; 1420 2b). 

John Lagerwey 

Zhenwu lingying hushi xiaozai miezui baochan SF18 

6 fols. 

Song dynasty (960-1279) 

814 (fasc. 567) 

“Litany of the Spirit of the North, for the Extirpation of Sins.” This ritual is cognate 
with 1412 Taishang yuanshi tianzun shuo beidi fumo shenzhou miaojing and the following 
liturgies ( 1413-1414 ) since in the present text (ia), the Heavenly Worthy says: “There- 
fore I revealed the Fumo jingfa ficMIMi'i.” However, there are no textual correspon- 
dences. The present ritual prescribes abstinence and acts of devotion (chizhai j^f|) 
on specific days of the year and the month (2a). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang shuo ziwei shenbing huguo xiaomojing 

3 fols. 

Song dynasty (960-1279) 

655 (fasc. 343) 

“Scripture of Quelling Demons, by the Divine Soldiers for the Protection of the 
State, spoken by the Most High.” This is a short text in honor of Zhenwu the 
great exorcist spirit of the North (Ziwei SK ), and divine protector ( huguo MM) of 
the Song empire. The text writes zhen jH for xuan , not only for the name of the 
god, but in such instances as the names of the three primordial pneumata xuan jf, 
yuan 76, and shi #q, here named zhen. (ib.8). It is therefore a Song text, notwithstand- 
ing the title of the god given on 3a, which dates to the Yuan (1279-1368). 

The present scripture relates the story of Zhenwu, his merits as an exorcist, and his 
appointment as protector of the state. 



Taishang shuo Xuantian dasheng zhenwu benchuan shenzhou miaojing 

II fols. 

775 (fasc. 556) 

“Scripture of the Divine Spell Personally Transmitted by Zhenwu, Great Saint of 
the Dark Heaven, and Spoken by the Most High.” The compilers of the Ming canon 
of 1445 placed this work in the pulu section of the Dongshen division, as- 
suming no doubt that it was a biography ( benzhuan $fH). The text, however, only 
mentions the Zhenwu ji£ legend in passing and focuses on his worship. The com- 
mentary of the present text by Chen Zhong (7S4 Taishang shuo Xuantian dasheng) 

explains that the divine spell (6a-b) was transmitted by the god personally; hence the 
title. Chen also seems to indicate that this text was revealed by planchette in 1184, to 
be recited by the Taoists of the age, according to an equally revealed text titled Xuandi 
shilu £ (i.4b-5a). The Xuandi shilu, qualified by Chen as “recent” (4b), must 

indeed be of a later date, as it features the Yuan title for Xuandi (see 961 Xuantian 
shangdi qisheng lingyi lu 9a). 

The present work does not observe the Song (960-1279) taboo on the character 
xuan £ and in every respect appears to be a modern popular book. It begins with a 
hymn in seven-character verses and is in general narrative in nature. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang shuo Xuantian dasheng zhenwu benchuan shenzhou miaojing 

6 juan 

By Chen Zhong HI* IS, hao Tianfang zi Yuan (1279-1368) ? 

754 (fasc. 530-531) 

“Commentary on the Scriptures of the Divine Spell.” This text bears the same title 
as the scripture it takes as its subject. The author is unknown beyond this work. The 
mention of the ordination title of Shengxuan neij iao dizi # £ is surprising 

for someone who certainly lived after the Song (960-1279) period (see 3a), and who 
calls himself “a man from the market,” chanren S A, to indicate his place of origin. 

It is equally surprising to find such a thorough and long commentary on what was 
certainly a popular text. Chen eclectically quotes a wide range of works, from the clas- 
sics to modern Taoist scriptures. 

Kristofer Schipper 



Kristofer Schipper 




[ 1196 ] 3 .B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult 

Beiji zbenwu puci dushi fachan 

io juan 

Ming (1368-1644) 

815 (fasc. 567) 

“Litany of Salvation by the True Warrior of the North Pole of Universal Compas- 
sion.” In this text, the canonization title of Zhenwu is given on page 1.3b as Beiji 
zhentian yousheng zhushun zhenwu lingying hide zhenjun 
St M ffi f 8 R H , followed by the Taoist tide, Yuxu shixiang Xuantian shangdi 5 
iSlSiitSS On the same page, the legend of the recluse of the Wudang shan 

K#i!l is recalled: during forty- two years Xuantian shangdi underwent eighty-one 
transformations, and it is stated that the god became united with the contellations of 
Xuanwu % )&) . Therefore, although the canonization tide is of Song (960-1279) date 
(see 962 Wudang fudi zongzhenji 3.1a), the remainder of the tides are Yuan (1279-1368) 
or Ming, with a greater likelihood for the latter dating. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Beiji zhenwu yousheng zhenjun liwen 

12 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644) 

816 (fasc. 567) 

“Rite of Homage to the True Warrior of the North Pole, True Lord of Saindy Suc- 
cor.” This text is cognate with the previous 81s Beiji zhenwu puci dushi fachan. It gives 
the god the tide of Yuxu shixiang Xuantian shangdi (ia). The 

various acts of grace are intermingled with descriptive poems in seven-character verse 
of a distincly vernacular flavor. In this the text resembles a Precious Scroll ( baojuan 

mm\ 

Kristofer Schipper 

Yuanshi tianzun shuo beifang zhenwu miaojing lR 

7 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644) 

27 (fasc. 27) 

“Marvelous Book of the Perfected Warrior of the North.” This tide is a popular 
scripture, otherwise unknown, for the cult of Xuantian shangdi jS the divine 

protector of the Ming dynasty. The legend of his forty- two years of ascetic practice on 
the Wudang shan |JL| is mentioned on 3a. 

The text opens with a hymn in seven-character verse in the style of the vernacular 
incantations of modem popular ritual. 

Kristofer Schipper 



3 .B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult [ 1197 ] 



figure 69. The Emperor of the Pole Star ( 121s 8b-9a). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the 
Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1198) 

Taishang beiji fumo shenzhou shagui lu 

20 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644) 

1215 (fasc. 879) 

“Register of the Lord of the North Pole [Star] Who Subdues Demons and Whose 
Divine Spells Kill Ghosts.” Like 1214 Gaoshang dadong Wenchang silu ziyang baolu , which 
precedes this work in the Ming Daozang of 1445, the present register was issued by the 
Longhu shan f|^|JL| headquarters of the Heavenly Masters and is signed by Zhang 
Yuqing j# (d. 1427), Heavenly Master of the forty-fourth generation (19b). 

The register is followed by an illustration representing the Emperor of the Pole Star 
as ruler of the Fengdu Slffl hells in the North (8b; fig. 69) with the seven stars of the 
Dipper (7b-8a). The text also gives the secret names of the residences of the devils in 
Fengdu (Fengdu liugong IPifP A^), as a requisite for subduing them. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang xuantian zhenwu wushang jiangjun lu ic -h ^ T; jBi Jl ip 

9 fols. 

1213 (fasc. 879) 

“Register of the Supreme General, the Real Warrior of the Most High Black 
Heaven.” This is a protective talismanic lu, issued for a fee to lay believers by the 
Heavenly Masters of the Longhu shan fl^Elil. The present version is reproduced 
from a printed copy ( 8 a) distributed under the Forty-fourth Heavenly Master, Zhang 
Yuqing (d. 1427)- 





[ iigS ] 3 .B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult 



3 .B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult [ 1199 ] 




The attestation of transmission is illustrated by an 
image of Zhenwu Ijj M (fig. 70). The register itself 
is coupled with a large talisman and accompanied by 
several exorcistic spells. A number of other documents 
linked to the transmission are appended. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang ziwei zhongtian qiyuan zhenjing 
4 fols. 

1421 (fasc.1055) 

“True Scripture of the Seven Primordial [Lumi- 
naries] at the Center of Heaven.” A short text with spells 
to invoke the seven stars of the Dipper constellation, 
which governs the universe. This text was doubtlessly 
intended for the rituals of the Dipper Lamp ( doudeng 
4 -M ) for the preservation of life and the avoidance of 
calamities. Coming right after the series 141s Beidi shou 
huoluo qiyuan jing, 1416 Qiyuan zhen jueyu quyi bijing, 
1417 Qiyuan xuanji zhaomo pinjing, 1418 Tuanshi shuo 
du Fengdu jing, 1419 Qiyuan zhaomo fu liutian shenzhou 
jing, and 1420 Qiyuan zhenren shuo shenzhen lingfu jing, 
concerning the cult of the Seven Primordial Shiners ( huoluo qiyuan SS^-blt;), the 
present work could well be connected with these ritual texts. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang jiutian yanxiang di’e sisheng miaojing 

14 fols. 

Fourteenth century (?) 

26 (fasc. 27) 

“Most High Miraculous Scripture of the Four Saints in the Nine Heavens Who 
Grant Good Fortune and Dispel Distress.” The Four Saints ( sisheng Hi?), Tianpeng 
^31, Tianyou Yisheng j% I? (previously Heisha ®|£), and Zhenwu MM, 
signify a constellation around the North Pole, to which special exorcistic powers are 
ascribed. Their significance is attested by the role that the sisheng acquire in the mod- 
ern exorcistic Taoist schools of the Song (960—1279) period (see, e.g., 1227 Taishang 
zhuguo jiumin zongzhen biyao 7-34b-35a). At least as early as the tenth century, there 



existed officially maintained places of worship to this constellation of four (see, e.g., 
PS8 Xuantian shangdi qisheng lu 2.i3a-b). 

Judging by the honorary titles that the deities bear in this work, meant for recita- 
tion, the text in its present form could not have been written prior to 1306 (cf. Zhen- 
wu’s title on page 2b with 961 Xuantian shangdi qisheng lingyi lu 10b). 

The work comprises several talismans that were to be hung in the house to obtain 
the deities’ assistance, as well as instructions for the ritual recitation of the scripture, 
for which up to forty-nine Zhengyi daoshi IE — 'Hit could be invited. 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

Xuantian shangdi baizi shenghao 

56 fols. 

1482 (fasc. 1108) 

“Holy Appellations in One Hundred Characters of the Emperor of the Dark Heav- 
en.” This title constitutes the introduction to the main work, the “All-Responding 
Oracle Slips of the Emperor of the Dark Heaven” ( Xuantian shangdi ganying lingqian 
£3E±3rMM!;2b). 

The oracles collected here are of the kind commonly used in temples for divina- 
tion through oracle slips ( lingqian MM). Besides the hundred-characters appellation, 
the introduction also includes a eulogy of the True Warrior, Zhenwu [KrK (ia-b), 
identified from the Yuan (1279-1368) onward with the Emperor of the Dark Heaven. 
The eulogy, which the present work attributes to the Song emperor Renzong (r. 
1023-1063), is also included in 9S8 Xuantian shangdi qisheng lu 8.24b, which names 
1184 as the date of the first apparition of the Emperor of the Dark Heaven (1.21a). 

If the present collection was indeed written in connection with the cult of this deity, 
it is not likely that it was compiled before the late Song (960-1279). The existence of a 
slightly different version in 1298 Sisheng zhenjun lingqian suggests, however, that some 
of its elements may date from an earlier period. The present edition was revised in 1607 
by Zhang Guoxiang HI for the publication of the supplement to the canon, the 
Xu Daozang M M M . 

The work contains forty-nine numbered oracles, allowing the user seeking divina- 
tion to select the oracle corresponding to the number on the slip previously drawn. 
The oracles then indicate their auspicious or inauspicious nature, a holy counsel ( sheng - 
yi H M ) in four verses of seven characters, a set of prognostics in verse ordered by 
categories, and finally, a comment (jie fjj) in prose. 

Marc Kalinowski 



figure 70. Xuantian zhenwu 
(1213 ib). Ming reprint of 1598. 
Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 
9546/1196) 




[ 1 200 ] 3.B.10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult 



3.B. 10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult [ izoi ] 



Xuantian shangdi shuo baofumu enzhong jing 

3 fols. 

By Zhao Yizhen (d. 1382) 

663 (fasc. 345) 

“Scripture on the Recompense for Parental Kindness, Spoken by Xuantian Shang- 
di.” The present text consists of the actual scripture (jing ), an invocatory formula 
with the canonical titles (shenghao W:%H) for Zhenwu j|| 3 £, and an explanatory post- 
face by Zhao Yizhen (for biographical details on Zhao, see 1071 Tuanyang zi fayu 
and Schipper, “Master Chao I-chen”). It is stated in this work that Taiqing dadi M'/n 

iff after his eighty-second physical transformation proclaimed this scripture as Xuan- 
tian shangdi £ Tc Jl'S’ to express gratitude to his parents. The 1224 Daomen dingzhi 
5.9b prescribes the recitation of a Zhenwu lingying zhenjun boo fitmu ende jing Hi^fl 
M £H It $ fz 5£ f3 H te! I? in one juan within the huanglu zhai Retreat, probably 

referring to the text of the present jing. 

Concerning the shenghao , Zhao explains a practice by pious sons and daughters, 
who during a three-year period of fasting (corresponding to the feeding period for 
infants) recite the litany of these tides 18,000 times (corresponding to the number of 
sections, pianmu H @ , in the complete canon of Taoist scriptures). 

Hcms-Hermann Schmidt 

Xuantian shangdi qisheng ^ !? H 

8 juan 

Yuan (1279-1368)? 

958 (fasc. 606-608) 

“Record of the Epiphany of the Supreme Ancestor of the Dark Heaven.” This tide 
represents a comprehensive hagiography of the God of the North. The appellation 
“Xuantian shangdi Ji'Sf” is part of the imperial canonization bestowed on the 
saint under the Yuan in 1303, “Yuansheng renwei xuantian shangdi 

The present work has neither preface nor colophon, but on page 1.5a there is 
a commentary, dated 1291, quoting the 962 Wudang fudi zongzhen ji (2.14b) by Liu 
Daoming §t!l M ■ In a general manner, the present hagiography appears to be in- 
spired by the Zongzhen ji. Some episodes seem to have been taken from other sources, 
such as the one signed by Dong Suhuang Jr % j|J , hao Feixia lingguang zhenren fft ff 
M R A, dated 1184 (i.2ob-2ib). The work contains no datable materials from the 
Ming (1368-1644); it probably belongs to the Yuan period (1279-1368). 

The narratives concern the deeds of the saint, his life on earth, and his posthumous 
miracles. The bulk of the stories date from the Tang, Five Dynasties, and both Song 
periods (seventh through thirteenth centuries). The beginning of the work retraces 
the saint’s life, from his birth, his youth, through awakening, to his ascent to Heaven 




figure 71. Apparition of Xuantian shangdi above the summit of Wudang 
shan in 1413 ( 9 S 9 i6a-b). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/952) 



(1.10a). The stories of his later manifestations all are highly moral in tone but set in a 
distinctly Taoist context. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Da Ming xuantian shengdi ruiying tulu 

25 fols. 

959 (fasc. 608) 

“Illustrated Album on the Auspicious Miracles Performed by the Supreme Em- 
peror of the Dark Heaven.” Xuantian shangdi % _h i rff (Xuanwu ) was reputed 

to have assisted the founder of the Ming dynasty (1368-1644) in his rise to power and 
therefore became the patron saint of the empire. The present hagiography reproduces 
a series of decrees by the Yongle emperor (r. 1403-1424), attesting to his devotion to 
the deity and to his support of the great complex of sanctuaries on Wudang shan ^ 
#lil- 

The richly illustrated text further features a series of apparitions of Xuantian shang- 
di at Wudang shan between 1412 and 1413 (see fig. 71). The manifestations are again in 
response to Yongle’s devotion and temple-building activities and give evidence of the 
tutelary god’s active support of the dynasty. 

Caroline Gyss-Vermande 



1 




[ 1202 ] 3.B.10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult 



Xuantian shangdi qisheng lingyi /» h ^ ^ §1 i§ 

18 fols. 

Ming dynasty (1368-1644) 

961 (fasc. 608) 

“Records of the Miraculous Manifestations that Occurred in Response to the Wor- 
ship of the Supreme Emperor of the Dark Heaven.” This tide is a collection of Yuan 
(1279-1368) inscriptions, petitions, decrees, and prefaces written between 1270 and 
1326. The author is unknown. The first two texts, inscriptions for the founding of the 
Zhenwu miao lH and the Zhaoying gong EIp temples in Peking, both dedi- 
cated to the saint, are dated 1270 and written by the Hanlin academician Xu Shilong ^ 
(1206-1285). The temples were founded by order of Kublai Khan in response to 
the miraculous appearances, in 1268 and 1269 respectively, of a turtle and a snake in the 
vicinity of the town. This was regarded as an auspicious omen for the Yuan dynasty. 

An inscription by Cheng Jufu (1249-1346), dated 1315, concerns the found- 
ing of the great Tianyi zhenqing wanshou gong MlM temple on Mount 

Wudang by Emperor Renzong (r. 1312-1320), on the initiative of the daoshi Zhang 
Shouqing. Cheng relates the beginning of the cult on Mount Wudang 
during the Zhenguang era (627-649) and the stages of its development. 

Next come the decrees for canonization: in 1304 for the saint himself, with the 
title Xuantian yuansheng renwei shangdi (10b); in 1314, for his 

parents and for Zhang Shouqing; in 1325 for the turtle and the snake. 

The present work also retains a certain number of prefaces of illustrated tracts pub- 
lished by Zhang Shouqing. The authors are the Thirty-eighth Heavenly Master, 
Zhang Yucai (1312,); Wu Quanjie, patriarch of the Xuanjiao school (1314); 

the academician Zhang Zhongshou 'jg'ftftlf (1322); Zhao Mengfu (1312); the aca- 
demician Zhao Bian (1312); Yu Ji iMM (1312); and Bao Siyi $!&,© j§ (1311). 

Caroline Gyss-Vermande 

Zhenwu lingying zhenjun zengshang yousheng zunhao cewen 

2 fols. 

By Emperor Huizong Wlin of the Song; 1108 

776 (fasc. 556) 

“Imperial Order Upgrading the [Canonical] Title of Zhenwu Lingying Zhenjun 
with [the Epithet] Yousheng.” This canonization by Song Huizong (r. 1100-1125) was 
granted in 1108 in response to a memorial presented by Yu Shen (d. 1132). In the 
same month, a Lingbao Golden Register Liturgy (Jinlu linghao daochang yifan jfz'M 
Hi ft? was also published (see Songshi 20.380). 



Kristofer Schipper 



3.B. 1 1 The Wenchang Cult [ 1203 ] 



Tuzhi Zhenwu miao bei [if $1 R Hi 5^ 

3 fols. 

By Emperor Ming Chengzu ^ ; 1415 

960 (fasc. 608) 

“Imperial Stele Inscription for the Zhenwu Temple.” This commemorative inscrip- 
tion by the Yongle emperor for the foundation of the Zhenwu miao R Iff temple in 
Peking is dedicated to the Supreme Emperor of the Dark Heaven (Xuantian shangdi 
The text is appended to gs 9 Da Ming xuantian shangdi ruiying tulu. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Wudang fudi zongzhen ji ^ life IS R Ifi 

3 juan 

By Liu Daoming flj ifi ; hao Dongyang zi 1291 

962 (fasc. 609) 

“Comprehensive Collection of True [Facts] concerning the Land of Bliss of Wu- 
dang.” This work is a gazetteer of the holy mountain Wudang til and its cult of 

Zhenwu or Xuandi There is a preface by the author, dated 1291, and a 

postface, dated 1301, by Lii Shishun S filti 1(10 , a retired official. 

Liu was named superintendent ( tidian HEjftSi) of the imperial foundations of the 
Wudang shan in 1286 (ib). His monograph covers the geography (juan 1 and 2), as 
well as the history of the cult (juan 3). It contains much valuable information, and 
quotes a number of sources that are lost today, such as the Xuandi zhuanji ijf f(Ul! 
(3.2b-i2b). 

Kristofer Schipper 



3.B.11 The Wenchang Cult 

The worship of Wenchang £ 1 !, patron of students, literati, and officials, origi- 
nated as a local nature cult in the mountains of Zitong # in northern Sichuan. An 
ancient god of Zitong appears in the fourth-century Huayang guozhi (91) as a serpen- 
tine Thunder deity. Situated on the road to Shu f] , the cult received imperial recogni- 
tion by the two Tang emperors exiled to Sichuan, Xuanzong (r. 712—756) and Xizong 
(r. 873-888). The Divine Lord of Zitong’s transformation into Wenchang 

and the spread of the cult throughout China were stimulated by a series of apparitions 
and manifestations under the Northern Song (960-1127). In 1181, the medium Liu 




[ 1204 ] 3 .B. 1 1 The Wenchang Cult 

Ansheng recorded the god’s revelations by means of spirit writing (Juji JJ; 

£L ). The text thus obtained is an early specimen of the morality book ( shanshu If U ) 
genre, in the guise of the god’s autobiography, or “Book of Transformations” ( Huashu 
i t H ; see Kleeman, A god’s own tale). 

This twelfth -cenmry Huashu is at the foundation of the small scriptural corpus 
associated with the Wenchang cult as transmitted in the Daozang. The Daozang ver- 
sion, 170 Zitong dijun huashu , a Yuan (1279-1368) recension, is followed here by a Ming 
(1368-1644) compilation of related hagiographic material, 169 Qinghe neizhuan. Two 
scriptures, 28 Tuanshi tianzun shuo Zitong dijun yingyan jing and 29 Yuanshi tianzun 
shuo Zitong dijun benyuan jing, probably dating to the thirteenth century, feature the 
Lord of Zitong in audience with Heavenly Worthy of Primordial Beginning, discuss- 
ing his mission as savior and keeper of the Cinnamon Record, in which the names and 
careers of scholar-officials were inscribed. The section concludes with an illustrated 
lu- If register for Wenchang adepts. 

Zitong dijun huashu f 5 ? (a S’ { t H 

4 juan 

Presented in 1316 

170 (fasc. 74) 

“Book of Transformations of the Divine Lord of Zitong.” This title constitutes a 
first person account, revealed through planchette, of the avatars and divine offices of 
the god eventually appointed Wenchang, god of literature and patron of examination 
candidates. 

The “Book of Transformations” survives in two recensions, one from the Southern 
Song entitled Wendi huashu SttfritW, reprinted in Daozang jiyao (“Xing M”), and 
the present Daozang text from the Yuan (1279-1368). Prefaces to the Wendi huashu 
record that the first seventy-three episodes (hua it ) were revealed to a medium named 
Liu Ansheng and three of his kinsmen in a temple on the otherwise unknown 

Baoping shan P [Jj near Chengdu, Sichuan, in 1181, and that the next twenty-one 
episodes were revealed in 1194. Internal evidence shows that the last three episodes 
date from around 1267. The preface to the Daozang edition states that at the beginning 
of the fourteenth cenmry there were northern and southern editions in circulation. 
The recension presented to the Yuan emperor in 1316, at the time of the ennoblement 
of the Divine Lord of Zitong as Wenchang, was based on the northern edition, but 
had been revised by the Divine Lord. Comparison of the two recensions reveals that 
this revision primarily involved emending or deleting passages unfavorable to non- 
Chinese peoples and rearranging the text to fill the gaps. All other editions of the work, 
including those in Wenchang collectanea like Wendi quanshu (preface 1775; 

edited by Liu Tishu §»!lfS 3 - 5 ) seem to be of the Southern Song (1127-1279) version 



3 .B. 1 1 The Wenchang Cult [ 120s ] 

(e.g., Pelliot B1374, British Library 15113^.4 and 5113. b.8). The earliest extant edition 
seems to be the one from 1645 in the Naikaku Bunko ft and at Harvard (dis- 

cussed in Sakai Tadao, Chugoku zensho, 412). 

A number of other texts were revealed to Liu Ansheng jjjlj $ during these spirit- 
writing sessions in the latter half of the twelfth cenmry, including an earlier recension 
of s Taishang wuji zongzhen Wenchang dadong xianjing (1168), 169 Qinghe neizhuan 
(1168-1181), and 1214 Gaoshang dadong Wenchang silu ziyang baolu (1181). 

The Huashu is an early example of the morality book genre. Through concrete 
examples drawn from his many temporal and divine incarnations, the Divine Lord 
teaches basic virtues such as filial piety, loyalty to the state, honesty, and compassion. 
Many, but not all, episodes center on appropriate behavior for officials, reflecting the 
important role of aspiring officials in the cult. The work is unique in its first-person 
viewpoint and its emphasis on the Sichuan region. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Kleeman, A god’s own tale. 

Terry Kleeman 

Qinghe neizhuan til M 1^3 

18 fols. 

Ming (1368-1644) compilation; original revelation between 1168 and 1177 

169 (fasc. 73) 

“Secret Biography of Qinghe.” This short autobiography, revealed by planchette, 
of one of the incarnations of the Divine Lord of Zitong (Zitong dijun ^ if ), is 

followed by documents concerning the god and his cult and several ethical treatises. 
During the Western Jin (265-316), the god is born to the Old Man of Qinghe M 
(i.e., Zhang Daoling ill [^ , see 1463 Han tianshi shijia 2.5b) and awakens to his di- 

vine family in a Cavern-Heaven. 

The “Secret Biography” itself was revealed between 1168 and 1177, and was inscribed 
on a stele in the god’s temple in the capital Lin’an (modern Hangzhou) in 1177 
(see Liang Zhejinshi zhi 9.55b-57a). This text provided the nucleus for the first seventy- 
three chapters of the Huashu it W , predecessor of 170 Zitong dijun huashu (see Wendi 
huashu 3 C ^fit U I5a-b and 86b-87a, in Daozang jiyao, “Xing M ”). The preface to 1299 
Xuanzhen lingying baoqian states that the “Secret Biography” was revealed at Shuang- 
song MIS, a place otherwise unknown but probably to be identified with Baoping 
shan, where most of the Wenchang H scriptures were revealed (see the abstract for 
170 Huashu). The “Secret Biography” is followed by an ennoblement of the god dated 
1265 and ennoblements of members of his family dated 1269. These appointments are 
different from the twelfth-century ennoblements recorded in Song huiyaojigao 1:792. 




[ 1206 ] 3 .B. 1 1 The Wenchang Cult 

Next is a Yuan (1279-1368) enfeoffment and a text bestowing a temple placard, dated 
1316. The “Exhortation to the Twenty-one Officers” (“Gaoyu ershiyi si wen am — 
-[ — • WJ A”) in which the god instructs subordinate officials on the performance of 
their duties, is also of Yuan date (cf. the reference to Dadu Af[R the Yuan capital). 
The “Subsidiary Shrine Record” (“Xingci ji commemorates the construc- 

tion of a new shrine to the god in Chengdu in 1341. The work concludes with two 
moral essays that seem to be of early Ming date, the “Tract Encouraging Reverence 
for Writing Paper” (“Quan jing zizhi wen fj]® AIK A”) and the “Tract Cautioning 
Scholars” (“Jie shizi wen ftScdr A A”)- 

Terry Kleeman 

Tuanshi tianzun shuo Zitong dijun yingyan jing 

4 fols. 

Thirteenth century (?) 

28 (fasc. 27) 

“Scripture of the Responses and Proofs of the Divine Lord of Zitong, expounded 
by Heavenly Worthy of Primordial Beginning.” At an audience before the Heavenly 
Worthy, the Divine Lord of Zitong (Zitong dijun l?jS$|q) vows to save all living 
creatures from the impending kalpa disasters. The scripture concludes with the divine 
appellation (hew jSf) of the Lord of Zitong. 

This scripture derives from the Zitong dijun, that is, the Wenchang A H cult, 
which arose during the Southern Song (1127-1279). A reference to ninety-four trans- 
formations (3b) dates the work no earlier than 1194, the date of composition of the 
last fourteen episodes of the Book of Transformations ( 170 Zitong dijun huashu). Epi- 
sodes 95-97 of this work date to around 1267; therefore the reference to ninety-four 
transformations can probably date the present text to the period 1191-1267, but it is 
possible that the ninety-four chapter recension remained in circulation into the Yuan 
period (1279-1368). Identification of the Divine Lord with Fenghuang shan MULlil 
rather than, as is more common, Qiqu shan -fc ft [if may indicate that this text derives 
from a rival cult center in the Zitong area in northern Sichuan. 

The Heavenly Worthy praises the Divine Lord’s repeated incarnations and refers to 
the Divine Lord’s role as keeper of the Cinnamon Record, which determines one’s fate 
as an official, as patron of literature, and as savior. He is to save the world by preaching 
moral transformation through the planchette. 

Terry Kleeman 



3 .B. 1 1 The Wenchang Cult [ 1207 ] 

Tuanshi tianzun shuo Zitong dijun benyuanjing 

12 fols. 

After 1194 

29 (fasc. 27) 

“Scripture of the Original Vow of the Divine Lord of Zitong, as Expounded by the 
Heavenly Worthy of Primordial Beginning.” In his Buddhist-inspired writ, the Divine 
Lord of Zitong (Zitong dijun better known as Wenchang AH, the 

patron deity of the literati and the examination system (see 170 Zitong dijun huashu ), 
is selected by the Heavenly Worthy to save men before the arrival of the impending 
kalpa disasters. 

Yuanshi tianzun TC# n A H presides over an audience at which the declining state of 
world morality and the impending disasters are discussed. When the Zhenren of Com- 
passionate Salvation (Ciji zhenren A) asks that someone be sent to relieve 

men in their misery, Yuanshi tianzun suggests a great god of Sichuan named Zitong, 
who controlled the fate of officials through his Cinnamon Record, had manifested 
himself in more than ninety transformations, had been entrusted by the Jade Emperor 
with a ruyi scepter, and had been assigned to convert the populace through the 
“flying phoenix,” or spirit-writing (2a). The reference to “ninety-odd transformations 
A A” dates the text to the period after 1194 (see 170 Zitong dijun huashu). Al- 
though it most probably was produced during the thirteenth century, before the cult 
was suppressed at the beginning of the Yuan (1279-1368), it is also possible that the 
text appeared only after the cult’s revival in the later Yuan. Unlike 28 Tuanshi tianzun 
shuo Zitong dijun yingy an jing, which links the god to an alternate cult-site on Feng- 
huang shan MaOi (also near Zitong #}'§:), this scripture clearly links the god to the 
traditional cult center on Sevenfold Mountain (Qiqu shan -t ffl ill ). 

Terry Kleeman 

Taishang wuji zongzhen Wenchang dadong xianjing 

AAMMAHA^M 

5 juan 

Attributed to Wenchang dijun revealed in 1168, revised in 1264, with 

an addition dated 1302 

5 (fasc. 16) 

“Great Cavern Scripture according to Wenchang.” This text is a ritualized version of 
the Dadong jing (see 6 Shangqing dadong zhenjing and 7 Dadong yujing) attributed to 
the popular saint Wenchang A H ■ The preface is attributed to the saint himself under 
his canonical name Gengsheng yongming tianzun M A 7R A A © ■ The saint tells how 
he once received the visit of three spirits who gave him the Dadong jing, together with 




[ 1208 ] 3 .B. 1 1 The Wenchang Cult 



3 .B. 1 1 The Wenchang Cult [ 1209 ] 



an accompanying register ( lu H) and a ritual (fa (f). This same preface is given in 
the commentary to the work: 103 Yuqing wuji zongzhen Wenchang dadong xianjing zhu 
2.i7a-2ia. The commentary version has a few variant readings. The preface in our text 
here quotes, in an abridged form, a number of passages from 170 Zitong dijun huashu 
(especially from juan i.3a-b and i.8a-9a of this hagiography). 

In an additional note, beginning on i.jaj of the preface, it is written that the saint 
presented a certain Liu Ansheng §?l| fc with this version through spirit writing 
(“jiangbi yu luantai P in 1168 and that almost a hundred years later, in 
1264, a certain Luoyi zi jjgi£ A received a revised version, presumably also by planch- 
ette, at the Mowei dong HI$(ij|I| grotto on Aotou shan tlgjl l(( (southern Sichuan, 
near Chongqing). The author of the revision was, according to the signature at the 
beginning of the book, a saint named Taixuan wushang shangde zhenjun 
Jl til 3 t H , otherwise unknown. An additional revelation of hymns ( song Ifi) related 
to the scripture was made in 1302. The saint says, on this occasion: “The Durenjing 
/§? AIM and the Dadong shu API I! are the ancestors of all scriptures. . . . Previously 
I have written hymns to the Durenjing. I have now made those for the Dadong jing 
and order all disciples to print this version and distribute it.” 

The major differences of the present version with those of 6 Shangqing dadong 
zhenjing and 7 Dadong yujing can be summarized as follows: 

1. There are only thirty-eight stanzas, instead of the traditional thirty-nine, as 
numbers 10 and n have been combined to form a single stanza. 

2. The text of the stanzas is given here without additional notes or 
commentary mentioning the names of the deities of the body and giving their 
description. From this we may conclude that the stanzas are simply meant to 
be recited here and were not intended to be accompanied by visualizations. 

3. There is an introductory ritual (juan 1 and 2), attributed to the saint 
Wenchang. This ritual is very similar to that given in 103 Wenchang dadong 
xianjing zhu. 

4. Among the textual variations from other versions, stanza number 4 (3.3a) 

here reads “likan instead of “lizi HA,” and stanza number 26 (5.3b) 

referes to “canghu jie the name of a pearl (similar to that mentioned 

in the Duren jing). 

I 

The stanzas that here occupy juan 3, 4, and 5 are in general closer to those found in 
the version of 7 Dadong yujing than to the version of 6 Shangqing dadong zhenjing. It 
is not clear whether the present text is the “old version” mentioned in 103 Wenchang 
dadong xianjing zhu, as there appear to be many discrepancies with that text, notably 
in the sequence of the stanzas (in 103 Dadong xianjing zhu, 3.13a begins with stanza 
number 11). 

Isabelle Robinet 




figure 72. Wenchang dijun and his acolytes ( 1214 i.ib-2a). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy 
of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1197) 




figure 73. Stellar guardian 
(1214 2.13b). Ming reprint 
of 1598. Courtesy of the 
Bibliotheque nationale de 
France. (Chinois 9546/1197) 



Gaoshang dadong Wenchang situ ziyang baolu jlS J: 

3 juan 

Fifteenth century (?) 

1214 (fasc. 879) 

“Precious Register of Purple Yang of the Career Con- 
troller Wenchang of the Highest Category.” The present 
lu is said to have been issued by the Heavenly Masters of 
the Longhu shan, reproduced from a copy delivered by 
the Forty-fourth Heavenly Master, Zhang Yuqing (Hi A (If 
(d. 1427; see 3.18a). The certificate of transmission is illus- 
trated with a portrait of Wenchang dijun and his acolytes. 
The register itself is divided into twenty-four chapters 
(pin ah), and the table of contents is given on 3.17b. 

The accompanying images for visualization are of a 
great variety: generals, scholars, officials, godesses, and 
even, in the last chapter (3.nb-i2b), eight visions of 
animals, monsters, and strange situations, which, when 
seen in a dream, announce great felicity (yingmeng ®.l?). 
(See figs. 72-74.) The illustrations of the dream visions are 



[ 1210 ] 3 .B .12 The Hongen Lingji Zhenjun Cult 



3 .B .12 The Hongen Lingji Zhenjun Cult [ mi ] 




figure 74. Auspicious dream images ( 1214 3. nb-iab). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy 
of the Bibliotheque nationale de France. (Chinois 9546/1197) 

followed by a number of examples of famous men of different periods in history who 
have owed their successes to this practice. 

Kristofer Schipper 



3.B.12 The Hongen Lingji Zhenjun Cult 

The writings in this section all come from the same temple cult located in central 
Fujian, in the vicinity of the city of Fuzhou. There, in the Lingji gong temple 

of Aofeng ^Jf$, two historical persons, Xu Zhizheng jU ff and Xu Zhie ^ gf , 
the fourth and fifth sons of Xu Wen (862-927), a statesman under the last em- 
peror of the ephemeral Wu ^ dynasty (902-937), are still honored today. During the 
troubled times of the Five Dynasties (907-960), the two brothers settled in Fujian, 
and some time after their death, they manifested themselves as the True Lords of Vast 
Mercy and Marvelous Succor ( Hongen lingji zhenjun fi S? R If ) through spirit- 

writing of a very high quality. Fujian during the Song (960-1279) and until the late 
Ming (1368-1644) was a region of great wealth and high cultural standards. Fuzhou 
especially was a center of literature and book printing. The fact that this local cult was 
highly literate was no doubt related to this cultural context. Imperial patronage was 



extended to the cult, and subsidiary temples were founded in Nanking and Peking. 
The acclaim of the writings of the Xu brothers was such that many of them were in- 
cluded in the Taoist canon of 1445 and again in the supplement of 1607. 

Xuxian hanzao $5 fill ^ 

14 juan 

1468 (fasc. 1083-1085) 

“Literary Writings of the Immortal Xu [Brothers].” In the province of Fujian, at 
Aofeng d# near Fuzhou, a spirit-medium cult devoted to two local saints arose in 
the Northern Song period (960-1279) (see 1.6b in the present text and Fuzhou fu zhi 
14.24b), continuing until modern times (s ccMinhou xian zhi 17.2a). These two saints 
are identified with two historical persons of the Five Dynasties period (907-960) : Xu 
Zhizheng (££□!§ and Xu Zhi’e (£ £□ , the fourth and fifth sons of Xu Wen 

(862-927), a statesman under the last emperor of the Wu ^ dynasty (902-937) and 
also the adoptive father of Li Bian ^fp. (alias Xu Zhigao f££Pln), the first emperor 
of the equally short-lived Southern Tang dynasty (r. 937-945). When the Southern 
Tang dynasty was founded, the two brothers received the tides of Jiangwang yXI 
and Raowang 

Among the many books that were produced by the cult of the Xu brothers and 
included in the Ming Daozang of 1445, the present collection is doubtless the earli- 
est. In the edition seen by the authors of the Siku tiyao (i47.37b-38a), these “literary 
writings” were originally prefaced, in 1295, by an educational intendant named Zhou 
Zhuangweng jUSE-ii. This preface is lacking in the Daozang edition. Indeed, the 
information in the Siku tiyao appears to be problematic, for an essay dedicated to the 
same Zhou Zhuangweng and dated 1299 is included in the collection (6.5b-7a). The 
colophon, by a certain Chen Menggen (14.6b), is dated 1305, and this is also 

the latest date to be found in the book. It therefore seems probable that the present 
work was edited during the Yuan (1279-1368) dynasty. It was probably printed only 
under the Ming (1368-1644), at the same time as the other collection produced by the 
cult (see the prefaces to 1470 Xuxian zhenlu). 

All the pieces contained in this collection were “written” by the immortal Xu broth- 
ers themselves, by spirit-writing ( luanji or jibi YEljl; sec 3.13a). The technique 

made use of a winnow basket. 

The collection is classified according to genre: commemorative inscriptions, po- 
ems, petitions, letters, and so forth. There are a few discrepancies between the table 
of contents and the actual text. Certain pieces are missing (e.g., “Shudu -jliifj” and 
“Changming deng shuo HEjfjMaji” at the end of juan 6). Some pieces of juan 7 are 
now to be found in juan 9 and vice versa. 

Kristofer Schipper 



[ I2U ] 3.B. 12 The Hongen Lingji Zhenjun Cult 

Xuxian zhenlu fiHlij 

4 juan 

Initially compiled by Huang Heng J| fH , hao Linqiu sanren A (1424); 

printed by Sun Jingkang (1443); with later additions 

1470 (fasc. 1086-1088) 

“True Records of the Immortal Xu [Brothers].” As the tide makes clear, this is a 
collection of materials related to the temple and worship of the immortal Xu broth- 
ers. The initial editor appears to have been Huang Heng, an old gentlemen from the 
locality who had been associated with the temple for a long time. He explains this in 
his own words on 1.8b. There are three prefaces. The earliest is that of Ma Mian flOHM, 
member of the Fujian provincial administration commission, dated 1424- Ma visited 
the temple and met Huang Heng, who showed him his manuscript and asked him to 
write a preface. At that time, the text had not yet been printed. The second preface, 
by Zhu Wei AM, dated 1441, relates that the printing in that year was sponsored 
by Sun Jingkang, the military commander of Fujian. Sun also financed a reprinting 
two years later, in 1443, and this time asked Wang Yongsheng §£ , professor at 
the Confucius temple in Fuzhou (Minxian ruxue HaJUM'P) to write a preface. The 
work does, however, contain much later material, such as a the text of a long imperial 
inscription for the restoration of the Peking temple (“Yuchi chongxiu Hongen lingji 
gongbei 3-6a-i3b), dated 1485. 

Ma’s preface reports that the first temple was built at Zhiyu Iffl (Aofeng?) in 
983. Juan 1 contains the most complete record available on the history of the cult and 
the different canonizations that were bestowed on the Xu brothers and their temple 
from Song times onward. Juan 2 contains the rituals that are also found separately in 
468-473 Hongen lingji zhenjun . Added to these are the oracle slips of the temple, “Hong- 
en lingji gong zhenjun lingqian RS'MM” (2.76a-95b). Juan 3 and 4 

contain materials on the construction of the temples at Aofeng and in Peking under 
the Yongle emperor (r. 1403-1424), as well as on their dispostion and the consecration 
rituals. Juan 5 contains various records on the temple, including land deeds. 

Tuan Bing ling and Kristofer Schipper 

Zanlingji ftltli 

4 juan 

Ming dynasty (1368-1644) 

1469 (fasc. 1085) 

“In Praise of the Spirit.” This is a collection of different writings in honor of the 
immortal Xu brothers, this time not by the gods themselves, but by various human 
authors. Juan 1 contains inscriptions (beiji 5 $gE); juan 2, ritual documents; juan 3, 
prefaces and other literary compositions; and juan 4, poems. The earliest inscriptions 



3.B.12 The Hongen Lingji Zhenjun Cult [ 1213 ] 

are most informative with regard to the history of the Lingji temple S JK . In the 
undated “Lingji gong ji S^UKlE” (i.iai), we learn that the sanctuary was founded 
on the site of an earlier temple. The Lingji wang ci ft $|JE had been the center of a 
local cult to an unidentified deity who made use of spirit writing. When the old temple 
was restored under its new name, divination ascertained the identity of the writing 
deity, revealed as a spirit by the name of Xu. Later, believers learned that in fact two 
spirits were involved, the souls of two well-known historical figures, the Xu brothers. 
Once their identity had been established, written documents poured forth at an as- 
tonishing rate. These events are more fully described in the stele inscriptions (dated 
1293) that follow the history (“Chongxiu Lingji gong ji i.9a-i2b). 

The text that was written to accompany a map of the place (“Aofeng shenxiu tu 

^ HI ”), by Wang Bao A jS, a local scholar who had been a secretary of the Hanlin 
academy, is dated 1411. At this time the gods had not yet received the great imperial 
honors they were to obtain a few years later in 1417. 

Among the prefaces there are two unsigned colophons for 1468 Xuxian hanzao ^ 

filiM. 

Tuan Bingling 

Hongen lingji zhenjun shishi (ft S ff ill Jt SW A 

9 fols. 

Ming dynasty (1368-1644) 

476 (fasc. 265) 

“Veritable Account of the True Lords of Vast Mercy and Marvelous Succor.” The 
saints of this tide are two historical persons, Xu Zhizheng and Xu Zhi’e 

gf , the fourth and fifth sons of the statesman Xu Wen (862-927). On the history 

of their cult, see also 1468 Xuxian hanzao. 

The Yongle emperor (r. 1403-1424) was cured from a serious illness thanks to the 
talismans and remedies emanating from the temple of the Xu brothers. As a token 
of his gratitude, the emperor had a new temple built for the saints at Aofeng Hill %, 
near present-day Fuzhou (Fujian). The name of the new temple was Lingji gong ft 
$ !ll[, and the two saints received new honorary titles preceded by the epithet “Vast 
Mercy” {hongen). The temple was inaugurated by the Forty-fourth Heavenly Master, 
Zhang Yuqing JSAiW (d. 1427). Similar temples were built in the two capitals of 
Nanking and Peking. Zhang Yuqing conducted a service of universal salvation {pudu 
"e ® ) with thousands of daoshi at the temple in Nanking (see 1463 Han tianshi shijia 
3.3oa-b). 

The present work contains the text of the commemorative stone inscription for the 
founding of the Lingji gong temple by the Yongle emperor (ia-3a). Next is found a 
short account of the lives of the immortal Xu brothers and some poetry. Finally, there 




[ 1214- ] 3.B. 12 The Hongen Lingji Zhenjun Cult 

is a memorial presented by a certain Master Wang, ordained in the Five Thunder 
magic Order of the Heavenly Pillar (Tianshu yuan see 1220 Dcwfa huiyuan 

249). The memorial concerns the performance of certain rituals written by the saints 
themselves, some of which have been preserved in the Daozang, such as 468-473 Hong- 
en lingji zhenjun yi, 474 Hongen lingji zhenjun liyuan wen, and 47 S Hongen lingji zhenjun 
qizhengxing dengyi. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Lingbao tianzun shuo Hongen lingji zhenjun miaojing 

2 fols. + 3 fasc. 

Preface by the Yongle /K^ emperor; 1420 

317 (fasc. 165) 

“Book of the True Lords of Vast Mercy and Marvelous Succor, Spoken by the 
Heavenly Worthy Lingbao.” This small scripture for the cult of the immortal brothers 
Xu ^ in northern Fujian recalls through its title and in the text the canonization 
obtained from the imperial court in 1417 (see 1470 Xuxian zhenlu 1.5b). In his preface, 
the emperor recommends the recitation of this scripture, and its distribution in print. 
The exalted position given to the present work as first scripture of the Dongxuan j|SJ % 
division of the Ming Daozang of 1445 may well be linked to this imperial patronage. 
The book is reproduced in 1470 Xuxian zhenlu i.34a-38a. The story of its revelation in 
Heaven is told in the same work (1.12a). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Zhou Shaoliang, “Ming neifii kanben.” 

Kristofer Schipper 

Hongen lingji zhenjun ziran xingdao yi f§ ^ fr fH 

7 fols. 

468 (fasc. 264) 

Hongen lingji zhenjun jifu suqi yi ^ ® M iff R It H Id If! ^ 

6 fols. 

469 (fasc. 264) 

Hongen lingji zhenjun jifu zaochao yi M ill SI If 16 ?§ #1 fH 

8 fols. 

470 (fasc. 264) 



3.B.12 The Hongen Lingji Zhenjun Cult [ 121s ] 

Hongen lingji zhenjun jifu wuchao yi $$ M jjf ij| ^ !§f| {H 

9 fols. 

471 (fasc. 264) 

Hongen lingji zhenjun jifu wanchao yi ® ® ft Hi HI ^ fH 
9 fols. 

472 (fasc. 264) 

Hongen lingji zhenjun qixie shejiao ke B lR ft iff Hf Si 14 

9 fols. 

473 (fasc. 264) 

Hongen lingji zhenjun liyuan wen S ill SB 

Preface 1 fol. + 43 fols. 

47+ (fasc. 264) 

Hongen lingji zhenjun qizheng xing dengyi ® S B H -fc ffil M ffl 
16 fols. 

Pubhshed in 1397 
475 (fasc. 265) 

“Rituals for the True Lords of Vast Mercy and Marvelous Succor.” This title repre- 
sents a collection of liturgical rites for the cult of the Hongen lingji zhenjun jft ® M 
y( ff , the two immortal Xu brothers of northern Fujian (see also the article on 1468 
Xuxian hanzao). According to the “Preface to the Rituals of Zhenjun” written in 1397 
by Ouyang Zhufang It (1469 Zanlingji 3.ia-2a), these eight texts were dictated 

by the immortal brothers themselves. 

The first six rituals are for a jiao H liturgy. They are in a traditional format, the only 
remarkable feature being that the two zhenjun occupy the place of the highest gods, 
and thus replace the Jade Emperor (Yuhuang shangdi ZE|| _h 'Sr ) at the head of the 
pantheon at the end of the consecration formula of the incense burner ( falu see 

468 ib). 

The votive ritual 474 Hongen lingji zhenjun liyuan wen is also reproduced in 1470 
Hongen lingji zhenjun qizheng xing dengyi (2.i6b-45b), as is 47s Hongen lingji qizheng 
xing dengyi (2.45b-6ob). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Hongen lingji zhenjun lingqian ® S iff R U M M 
8 fols. 

1301 (fasc. ion) 

“Oracle Slips of the True Lords of Vast Mercy and Marvelous Succor.” This is a col- 
lection of oracles used for divination through oracle slips ( lingqian MM, )■ Hongen 




[ ai6 ] 3.B.13 The Zhenyuan Scriptures 



3 .B. 1 3 The Zhenyuan Scriptures [ 1217 ] 



lingji zhenjun #£ ® S $1 R © is the title given to the euhemerized figures of the two 
Xu brothers. They were model officials of the Southern Tang dynasty (937-975)- 
Their cult appeared in Fujian, where it flourished under the Southern Song (1127- 
1279). It was later given imperial support during the Ming (1368-1644) dynasty (see 
476 Hongen lingji zhenjun shishi ia-6a). 

The divination through oracle slips is intimately linked to the cult of the gods gov- 
erning the oracle, in this case the Lingji zhenjun. The present collection must therefore 
have originated in one of their temples. Its date is uncertain; it may be as early as the 
Song (960-1279), or as late as the Ming, when the old temple in Fujian was restored 
and a new one built in the capital {476 Hongen lingji zhenjun shishi 2a, 6a). 

Each of the fifty-three oracles has a number that allows one to match it with the 
number of the slip previously drawn by the believer seeking a divination. Every oracle 
also indicates its auspicious or inauspicious nature, and provides a poem in four verses 
of seven characters in a literary style. This style, also used in 1302 Lingji zhenjun Zhu- 
sheng tang lingqian , distinguishes these two collections from other oracles preserved 
in the Daozang. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Lingji zhenjun Zhusheng tang lingqian 

10 fols. 

1302 (fasc. 1012) 

“Oracle Slips of the Hall of Recording Births of the True Lords of Marvelous Suc- 
cor.” This is a collection of oracles used for divination through oracular slips ( lingqian 
£3£).Its origin and dating are similar to those of 1301 Hongen lingji zhenjun lingqian. 
The present work differs from that text only by the number of oracles, sixty-four in 
the place of fifty-three. The title indicates that the divination through the slips took 
place in the Zhusheng tang, or Hall of Recording Births, probably a part of the temple 
devoted to the Lingji True Lords. 

Marc Kalinowski 



3.B.13 The Zhenyuan Scriptures 

The ten texts that make up this section, scattered in different parts of the Zheng- 
tong canon, share a number of significant characteristics and clearly belong to the 
same movement. This movement refers to itself as the ‘True Origin” (Zhenyuan H 
7C ) school. Many of its texts feature this term. Another recurring expression is “Shang- 



fang ± fj ” the highest sphere among the ten cardinal points: the eight points of the 
compass, the zenith, and the nadir. Prominent among the practices of the school is 
the meditation on the ten deities of these ten directions of space. These are the Ten 
Heavenly Worthies ( tianzun # ), or Ten Buddhas. They constitute the origin of the 
cosmos. At the same time, the deity of the uppermost direction (shangfang) is given 
the name of“Minghuang Elf} Jl,” and this Minghuang tianzun Hfjjlf is identified 
with the Taoist Tang emperor Xuanzong (r. 712-756), whose posthumous name was 
Minghuang (see 436 Shangfang dadong zhenyuan miaojing pin _h 77 yfi&R era )■ 

Tang Minghuang thus becomes the supreme deity, the great ancestor, and the reveal- 
ing spirit of the school. 

This mixture of theology and history is characteristic of the Zhenyuan movement. 
An appendix to S7 Shangfang tianzun shuo zhenyuan tongxian daojing (i6a-2ia) con- 
tains liturgical instructions attributed to a certain Master Shi of the Highest Purity 
(Taiqing Shi gong jif ). This Master Shi may well be Shi Yong 0#^ (fl. 1159), 
zi Yaomin the editor of the commentary in 696 Daode zhenjing quanjie who is 
mentioned at the beginning of 437 Shangfang dadong zhenyuan miaojing tu. On the 
other hand, in the appendix to S7 Zhenyuan tongxian daojing , Shi addresses himself 
to a certain “Ziming fpElfi,” the zi-'f- style of the Tang master Chen Shaowei (fl. 
between 712 and 734). Such anachronisms are plentiful. For instance, both the preface 
and the text of 696 Daode zhenjing quanjie are signed “Shi Yong Xiaoyao B# jH,” 
which seems to indicate that Shi Yong’s hao was Xiaoyao. A person named Xiaoyao is 
also one of the patriarchs of the movement that produced the Shangfang texts. The 
colophon of 436 Shangfang dadong zhenyuan miaojing pin cites a Master Shi Xiaoyao 
speaking to an unidentified Taiqing yuke and the author calls himself a 

disciple of Xiaoyao (Xiaoyao menxia iEtiDFIT )• But 439 Shangfang dadong zhenyuan 
tushujishuo zhongpian begins with Ziming (Chen Shaowei) saying to Li Fang ^ 
Hfj , the minister of Song Taizong (r. 976-997) : “I once heard Xiaoyao say . . . when I 
met Master Sima Boyun 15] 8 [i.e., Sima Chengzhen (647-735)] on [Mount] 

Wangwu. ...” It is clear, then, that the Shangfang movement took great liberties with 
history, freely mixing historical and divine figures. These features suggest that the 
Zhenyuan or Shangfang scriptures emanated from a highly syncretistic lay movement 
within the realm of modern popular Taoism. 

Although few in number, some of the texts of this school have been noticed by 
scholars in modern times and singled out as important documents. For example, the 
diagrams of 437 Zhenyuan miaojing tu have drawn the attention of students of Neo- 
Confucianism. Feng Yu-lan, in his History of Chinese Philosophy (2:438), considers that 
Zhou Dunyi (1017-1073) may have been inspired by the schema in 437 Zhen- 

yuan miaojing tu for the design of his own Diagram of the Supreme Ultimate (Taiji 
tu H ), since the Daozang text, prefaced by the Tang emperor Xuanzong, was of 




[ I2i8 ] 3.B. 13 The Zhenyuan Scriptures 



a much earlier date. As we shall see below, however, that preface cannot be authentic, 
nor can the Zhenyuan texts be of such an early date. 

On the basis of internal evidence, we must conclude that the works under consid- 
eration here belong to the Ming dynasty (1368-1644). Some of the indications are 
specific, such as the use of the title Xuantian shangdi Sell'S?, the Ming canonical 
name for Xuanwu £;[l£, in 99s Tuanyuan daomiao dongzhen jipian 7a. Others are more 
circumstantial, such as the use of spirit money for an offering to the same deity, or 
the insistence on female self-immolation. The anachronistic conflation of history and 
theology in these texts evoke the intellectual and devotional world of the religious 
novels of the Ming period. 

Shangfang tianzun shuo zhenyuan tongxian daojing 

22 fols. 

57 (fasc. 30) 

“Scripture of the Tao on the [Deity of the] True Origin Who Attained Immortal- 
ity, Spoken by the Heavenly Worthy of the High Regions.” The text is divided into 
three chapters ( pian M). The first, under the title Revelation of the Virtue of the 
Highest Ultimate (“Taiji jiangde shangpian describes the hieroph- 

any of the Heavenly Worthy of the High Regions as bom from the Very Great One 
Pneuma of the True Origin ( zhenyuan haohao yiqi ^ In the beginning, 

he pronounced the Ten Names ( shihao TM) of the supreme deities of the universe. 
The second chapter (5a) is titled Virtue’s Return to Simplicity and the Void (“Degui 
suwu Iflff ^£E”). It advocates the union of all Taoist scriptures of the canon with 
the classics of Confucianism ( sanfen zhi dian HIHa-USI). The last chapter. The [God 
of] True Origin’s Attainment of Immortality (“Zhenyuan tongxian jj| 7C ill fill”), tells 
about the revelation of cosmic texts ( zhang $ ) written in “cloud seal” ( yunzhuan ff 
^ ) characters, as instruments for salvation. 

An appendix (i6a-2ia) contains instructions for the ritual practices related to the 
foregoing revelations. These instructions are attributed to a Master Shi of the Highest 
Purity (Taiqing Shigong T jif§^F2), referring perhaps to Shi Yong B#$i, zi Yaomin 
His], hew Xiaoyao Mill (see the introduction to this section). 

The ritual practices are (1) the recitation of the Ten Names and (2) the invocation 
of protective deities by writing on given days the “cloud seal” characters on paper and 
making “charm water” (Jushui f^zR) with them. 



Kristofer Schipper 



3.B.13 The Zhenyuan Scriptures [ 1219 ] 



Shangfang dadong zhenyuan miaojing pin _h f] T '/]«) K 7C m 

8 fols. 

Preface attributed to Tang Minghuang E^Jl (Emperor Xuanzong, r. 712-756) 

436 (fasc. 196) 

“Chapters from the Marvelous Scripture of True Origin, the Great Cavern, and 
the Highest Direction.” In the preface, fictitiously attributed to Tang Minghuang, the 
emperor relates his awakening to the Tao and its esoteric traditions. It stresses the need 
to be initiated and to receive the registers and charts (lu $| and tu HI ), as revealed by 
the Divine Ancestor of the True Origin (Zhenyuan shengzu il 7C II! ) and Heav- 
enly Worthy of the Highest Direction (Shangfang tianzun The preface 

quotes from 987 Taishang dongxuan lingbao tianguanjing, a short Tang-period Lingbao 
scripture. The citation is taken from 5b-6a, but is largely emended and altered to suit 
the purposes of the present work. The author of the present scripture may have been 
inspired by the fact that 987 Lingbao tianguanjing introduced the Heavenly Worthy 
of the Ten Directions and gave the Shangfang tianzun the name of Minghuang. From 
this, he appears to have concluded that this Heavenly Worthy was the same person as 
the historical Tang Xuanzong, whose posthumous name was Minghuang. 

There is an undated colophon (6a-b) by an anonymous disciple of the Liberty 
school ( xiaoyao menxia MM PIT), reporting a discussion by his master Shi Xiaoyao 
B# M M (Shi Yong B# ; fl. 1159), who explained that there were three grades of scrip- 
tures: the Shangfang kaihua jing TTHHTIS and the Tanfan jing consti- 

tuted the lowest degree; the Zhenyuan jing [)H jef? the middle class, and the Dadong 
[zhenjjing TM the highest attainment. 

The text is composed of three sections ( pin pq), the first of which (ia-2b) has the 
same title as the book. It describes the revelation of the Zhenyuan scriptures. The 
second section presents itself as spoken by an unidentified Shenfeng xiansheng 

The third, spoken by an equally unknown Qingyun jushi ft f8/gjT, deals 
with the divine efficacy of the scripture. It recommends that each year, on the festival 
day of the Immortal of the True Origin (Zhenyuan xianjie Mjiil IlSfJ), the third day 
of the third lunar month, one should recite the Zhenyuan jing one hundred times 
and present an offering of “life-bestowing spirit money” ( shousheng mingqian ft 
TTTi) equivalent to ten thousand strings of cash. Adepts are also told to wear a 
special talisman, represented on page 5a, which should be renewed every year on the 
festival of the Immortal Holy Prince (Shengwang xianjie !? 3: fill M5 ), that is, the saint 
Zhenyuan. 



Tuan Bingling 




[mo ] 3 .B. 13 The Zhenyuan Scriptures 



3 . B. 13 The Zhenyuan Scriptures [ 1221 ] 




figure 75. Cultivating immortality 
through the sublimation of the True 
Person ( 437 10b). Ming reprint of 1598. 
Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale 
de France. (Chinois 9546/435) 





figure 76. Officiant going to audience at the 
Gold Portal (437 12b). Ming reprint of 1598. 
Courtesy of the Bibliotheque nationale de 
France. (Chinois 9546/435) 




Shangfang dadong zhenyuan miaojing tu MM TCil'P $§! PI 

9 fols. 

437 (fasc. 196) 

Shangfang dadong zhenyuan yinyang zhijiang tushu houjie 

13 fols. 

438 (fasc. 197) 

“Diagrams of the Marvelous Scripture of True Origin, the Great Cavern, and the 
Highest Direction,” and “Additional Explanations on the Diagrams and Texts on 
Ascent and Descent.” These two titles in fact refer to a single work. The second tide 
appears to be a subtide to the first. Presumably, the edidors of the Daozang divided 
the original work into two. 

The present work is in all respects a sequel and an enlargement of the preceeding 
436 Shangfang dadong zhenyuan miaojing pin. It starts out with Shi Yaomin 
that is, Shi Yong (A- 1159), questioning the Immortal Lord ( xianjun f[Jlit ) on 
the True Origin of the Great Cavern. The text then introduces twelve diagrams to 
illustrate Taoist cosmogony, beginning with a chart of the Void Spontaneous ( xuwu 
ziran MM § ffl)- Next come diagrams, for example, on Primordial Chaos ( hunyuan 
tHjt;) and the Supreme Ultimate (taiji The long text that follows the diagram 

on the energy cycle ( qiyun Mtll ; 5a-9a) is very similar to that of 99s Yuanyuan daomiao 
dongzhen jipian . 



As in 436 Zhenyuan miaojing pin, the worship of the great saint of the North Xuan- 
wu (here called Zhenjun yaH) figures prominendy, and the legend of his forty- 
two years of ascetic retreat on Wudang shan is mentioned on page 3a. 

The “Diagrams of the Marvelous Scripture” has only five diagrams, and the “Ad- 
ditional Explanations” contains the remaining seven. The first drawing illustrates the 
phases of yin and yang, and hence fire-phasing in alchemy. The text quotes the Song 
of Alchemy (“Jindan ge by Gao Xiangxian (fl. 990-1013; see 1079 

Zhenren Gao Xiangxian jindan ge). Minhuang EJfjJi, the Tang emperor Xuanzong (r. 
712-756), is mentioned on page 10b. (See figs. 75 and 76.) 

Yuan Bingling 



Shangfang dadong zhenyuan tushu jishuo zhongpian 

6ff. 

439 (fasc. 197) 

“Final Chapter of the Continued Explanations of the [Marvelous Scripture of] True 
Origin, the Great Cave, and the Highest Direction.” In spite of its tide, this fragment of 
the Zhenyuan scriptures appears to be distinct from the preceding texts. The work be- 
gins with a discussion between “Ziming (thezi of Chen Shaowei,H. 712-734) 

and the early Song statesman Li Fang ^ 55 (924-995), a glaring anachronism. “Xiao- 
yao M that is, Shi Yong (fl. 1159), is also present, as is Sima lianshi 
probably referring to Sima Chengzhen. The subject of the discussion is the origin 
of the Zhenyuan scriptures and their distribution: These books should be printed and 
given away by all those blessed with good health and fortune. The highest merit would 
accrue from this action. The text continues by explaining the origins and the develop- 
ment of the Taoist canon and the Three Caverns from the three original pneumata. The 
final lines of the text resemble those in 99s Yuanyuan daomiao dongzhen jipian. 

Yuan Bingling 



Taishang qingjing yuandong zhenwen yuzi miaojing 

6 fols. 

986 (fasc. 618) 

“Marvelous Scripture of True Writs and Jade Characters.” This book consists of a 
collection and explanation of secret names that may have been linked to certain Shang- 
qing _h '/if and Lingbao fijf registers. The names of the five Lingbao emperors, for 
example, are those of 388 Taishang lingbao wufuxu 3.6a. These names are the “true writs 
and jade characters” of the tide, but the present scripture gives their “translation” into 
characters of this world from their original form as “cloud characters.” Without these 




[ 1222 ] 3 . B . 1 3 The Zhenyuan Scriptures 



3 . B . 1 4 Other Popular Cults [ 1223 ] 



“cloud characters,” the present text makes little sense. Moreover, the relation between 
the text and the first part of its title is not clear. 

John Lagerwey 

Yuanyuan daomiao dongzhen jipian (Jnl M f|B| B US H 

3 juan 

Attributed to Li Jingyuan A it A 

995 (fasc. 619) 

“Sequel to the Dongzhen [Scriptures], Marvels of the Tao of Abyssal Origins.” 
This is a short medical handbook, concerning in particular the energy cycles ( qiyun %, 
m ) and other cosmological factors. The author signs it as “disciple of the Zhenyuan 
[school]” ( zhenyuan menren (ft API A)- The main text comes with a commentary, 
most likely by the same author. Juan 3 is devoted to miscellaneous matters. It quotes 
the waidan of Langran zi A , said to have been head of the Tongxuan guan 

temple in Tang times (618-907) and of the Jizhenguan (PI HM temple under 
the Song Duangong era (988-989), during which period he rose up to Heaven. The 
citation in question (3.3a, fine 3) can be found in the preface to 291 Taixuan Langranzt 
jindao shi. In a final commentary, the author introduces Minghuang tianzun HJ] A A 
Ht and Minghuang jiaozhu of the Zhenyuan school and its scriptures. He 

also mentions the worship of Xuantian shangdi A AAA, the Ming canonical name 
for Xuanwu A A (3.7a, line 1). At the end of the book, there is a note advocating lay 
Buddhism (3.6a), as well as a memorial by the author presenting the book to an un- 
identified emperor. 

Yuan Singling 

Shangfang lingbao xvuji zhidao kaihua zhenjing A A M ® A ill f#l A 33 A? 

3 juan 

1x33 (facs. 766) 

“True Scripture of the Transformation through the Infinite and Supreme Tao, of 
the Highest Direction Lingbao Canon.” According to the colophon of 436 Shangfang 
dadong zhenyuan miaojing pin A fj A PI qn (6a), a work called the Shang- 

fang kaihua jing A A AIAIS corresponded to the initial phase of attainment within 
this school. This must be the present work, which is manifestly intended for a lay 
audience. 

The three juan are subdivided into twenty-four chapters ( zhang Ijl ). The first eight, 
in juan 1, are dedicated to Confucian instructions concerning the correct moral be- 
havior of rulers, subjects, fathers, mothers, elder and younger brothers, and sons and 
daughters. The last chapter emphatically stresses female chastity, not only of daugh- 



ters, but also of wives, and advocates their self-sacrifice as “female martyrs” ( lienii JxlJ 
it ). This section also has a long “commentary” explaining Inner Alchemy theory, 
particularly for women. 

Juan 2 and 3 are related more to the practice of the Tao, not only by the individual, 
but also liturgically. For instance, the first zhang of juan 2 gives instructions about 
how to conduct funeral and requiem services for deceased family members. The text 
is very syncretistic, constantly mixing Confucian, Taoist, and Buddhist precepts and 
concepts. For instance, in 2.9a, the study of the Shujing and the Yijing 
of the Daode jing j! t|j |§| and the Yinfu jing , as well as the Nirvana sutra is 

recommended in a single sentence. The theory of the unity of the Three Teachings is 
expounded in 3.19b. 

Yuan Bingling 

Shangfang juntian yanfan zhenjing A A A iff 16 Jl If 

2 fols. 

1134 (fasc. 767) 

“True Scripture Expounding the Model of High Heaven of the Highest Direction.” 
As with 1133 Shangfang lingbao wuji zhidao kaihua zhenjing, this is a doctrinal treatise 
for beginners in the Zhenyuan school (see 436 Shangfang dadong zhenyuan miaojing 
pin A AAPRA&£$?np 6a). Divided into three chapters (zhang), this short text 
rehearses a number of Confucian, Taoist, and Buddhist commonplaces. The text ends 
with a poem by Bo Yuchan. 

Yuan Bingling 



3.B.14 Other Popular Cults 

The emancipation of lay communities and their temple organizations is the fore- 
most characteristic of Chinese religion in modern times. Whereas Taoism during the 
medieval period was opposed to temple cults devoted to one’s ancestors (that is, 
mortals), as against the worship of the “pure” immortals, this changed, as we have 
seen, with the development of the great merchant centers, especially in the Jiangnan 
era, from the Five Dynasties (907-960) and the Song (960-1279) period onward. It 
should be noted that this development of urban society and the growing importance 
of temple organizations occurred during a period of Confucian renewal and, as many 
texts in the Taoist canon show, of a close association between Confucianism and Tao- 




[ 024 ] 3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults 



3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults [ 122 s ] 



ism. The worship of local saints was common to both traditions. Yet in the Zhengtong 
Daozang, scriptures devoted to the worship of a given saint are few. Tianfei 
(Mazu $f j®) is honored through the 649 Taishang laojun shm Tianfei jiuku lingyan 
jing, and Wenchang dijun with several works, such as 29 Yuanshi tianzun 

shm Zitong dijun benyuan jing. The Xu brothers from Fuzhou’s Hongen lingji 
gong (4 M M 1$ Pi temple produced the 317 Lingbao tianzun shm Hongen lingji zhen- 
jun mimjing , which was placed, with a preface by the Yongle emperor (r. 1403-1424), 
at the very beginning of the Dongxuan division. Many other saints were not 
represented at all. This situation changed dramatically with the 1607 supplement to the 
Daozang, which contains the holy books of numerous popular saints such as Guandi 
Hf ff and Bixia yuanjun §f it ft H , as well as whole collections of the divination slips 
to be used in their temples. During the Ming period (1368-1644) as well, widely dis- 
tributed religious literature in the form of popular handbooks for astrology, everyday 
magic, home remedies, and simple exercises in meditation and recitation flourished, 
and these also found their way into the canon. The present section groups such texts 
under the common heading “popular cults.” 

3.B.14.a Scriptures of Popular Cults 

Taishang laojun shuo Tianfei jiuku lingyan jing 

7 fols. 

Between 1409-1413 
649 (fasc. 342) 

“Scripture of the Miracles [Worked] by the Celestial Consort for Saving from 
Distress, Pronounced by Taishang Laojun.” This work documents the inclusion of 
Mazu (Hj®, die popular protector of seafarers, into the Taoist pantheon. The cult to 
the goddess, which originated on Meizhou jfi'jj'l, a small island off the Fujian coast, 
had since the twelfth century gained an increasing popularity, reflected in successive 
bestowals of official honorary titles. Some of these ddes are mentioned in the present 
text, the latest among them being the one conferred in 1409 (ib, 3b). A printed edition 
of the work with illustrations, kept in the Tenri Library, has a colophon dated 1414 
in which the donor declares that by its publication he had fulfilled a vow made in the 
previous year (Sawada Mizuho, “Tenri-toshokan shoken dosho shiroku” 90; the text 
of that edition is reproduced in Li Xianzhang, Baso shinko no kenkyu, 34-38). 

In the present work, the former local deity becomes the incarnation of a Jade 
Maiden dwelling in the Northern Dipper 4 t 4 -- After a short meritorious life on 
Earth, she vows to act as a protector in difficult situations (seafaring, commerce, 
childbirth). Thereupon she is appointed “Support of the Dipper” (Fudou $$ 4 ") and 



“Saint Empress of the Gold Portal” (Jinque shenghou in the Taoist pan- 

theon. A fu, together with a formula of invocation, concludes the short work. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Boltz, “In homage to T’ien-fei”; Li Xianzhang, Baso shinko no kenkyu; Wiethoff, “Der 
staatliche Ma-tsu Kult.” 

Ursula- Angelika Cedzich 

Dahui jingci miaole tianzun shuofude wusheng jing 

8 fols. 

1192 (fasc. 875) 

“Scripture of the Five Saints of Good Fortune, Pronounced by the Heavenly 
Worthy Dahui Jingci Miaole.” This text is presented in the framework of the ritual 
of canonization that confirmed fusion of the Taoist deity Zhengyi lingguan [Ma] 
yuanshuai with Wuxian lingguan dadi 5 H® tS^'Sr, that is, 

the Wuxian deities who had descended from the illegitimate cult of the Wutong 2 J§ 
spirits. Although the fusion of Ma yuanshuai’s Wutong into their orthodox alter ego 
had been under way for some time (see, e.g., 1220 Dcwfa huiyuan 222.4a; 250.15b), a 
direct identification would hardly have been acceptable to Taoists prior to the national 
recognition of the Wuxian by MingTaizu (r. 1368-1398; see the article on 206 Wuxian 
lingguan dadi dengyi ). 

Our text, which also alludes to the association of the Wuxian with Huaguang 
ft (cf. 1448 Taishang dongxuan lingbao Wuxian guan Huaguang benxing miaojing ), 
already contains numerous elements that reappear in a narrative form in the popular 
Ming novel Nanyouji Besides fii-talismans and specifically Taoist titles for 

the five deities, we also find the official honorary titles granted to the deities in 1257. 

The popular character of this work is underlined by the recommendation to pro- 
mote the scripture through printing. 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

Taishang shuo Qingxuan leiling faxing yindi miaojing 

5 fols. 

1198 (fasc. 875) 

“On the Origin of the Religious Practice of the Green-Black Thunder Commander, 
a Scripture Spoken by the Most High.” This holy book is a hagiographic product of the 
cult of the god Wen Qiong 1 % , from Pingyang (Wenzhou jS'j'H, Zhejiang). 

The presentation of the god and his powers as an exorcist corresponds in general 







[ 1226 ] 3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults 

to his biography given in the Ming (1638-1644) Sanjiao yuanliu shengdi fozu soushen 
daqutm , and is different from his story in 780 Diqi shangjiang Wen taibao zhuan. From 
internal evidence (ib), we can deduce that this scripture was produced in northern 
Sichuan ( Shujing zhi zhong ), whereas the cult originated in Zhejiang. This 

discrepancy may be explained by the fact that the cult was very active in Sichuan. Wen 
Qiong’s hagiography narrates, for example, how the god liberated the Shu if) region 
(Sichuan) from a plague demon (see 780 Wen taibao zhuan 4b-sb). 

The invocation of the god in seven-syllable verse that stands at the beginning of the 
present work is still in use today. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Tuanshi tianzun shuo dongyue huashen jisheng dusi bazui jieyuan baoming 

xuanfan gaozhou miaojing 7 C ^ nft Hi it # (F @ If- ^ M mf S 

mmmm 

12 fols. 

1441 (fasc. 1063) 

“Marvelous Scripture of Redemption by the Emperor of the Eastern Peak.” During 
a seance in the Daluo heaven, four zhenren ask the Heavenly Worthy of Primordial Be- 
ginning to save the living and the dead from all their miseries. The Heavenly Worthy 
responds by telling them of the divine origin of the Emperor of the Eastern Peak. He 
then gives them a series of invocations addressed to that emperor and a number of his 
underlings. It is the recitation of this text, and in particular of “the invocations of the 
Celestial Chart” it contains, that will “save the living and the dead” from the sins and 
grievances mentioned in the title of the text. The illiterate may ask a Zhengyi priest to 
perform the recitation for them. 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang sanyuan cifu shezui jie’e xiaozai yansheng baoming miaojing 

II fols. 

Soudicrn Song (1127-1279)? 

1442 (fasc. 1063) 

“Most High Marvelous Life-Protecting Scripture of the Three Principles Granting 
Happiness, Forgiving Sins, and Averting Disasters.” This work is also known as the 
Book of the Three Officials (Sanguan jing ^TeTI??). The Three Officials of Heaven, 
Earth, and Water have been important deities in liturgical Taoism since Han (206 
b.c.-a.d. 220) times. At a later stage, their cosmological function earned them the 
tide ‘Three Principles,” that is, the primordial cosmic forces. 

The scripture, one of the most popular texts for recitation in modern Chinese reli- 



3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults [ 1227 ] 

gion, is referred to in the commentary by Wei Qi JJd , dated 1309, in 103 Yuqing xvuji 
zongzhen Wenchang dadong xianjing zhu. It should therefore have existed at least since 
Yuan times (1279-1368) and possibly even during the Southern Song (1127-1279). 

Its vast popularity made this text one of the most widely printed scriptures in Ming 
times. The edition in the 1607 supplement to the canon, the Xu Daozang Hxllic 
reproduces one such printing, intended for lay readers, giving all the indications and 
introductory formulas usually known to a daoshi as applicable to all scriptures of this 
kind. See also the edition of 1470 in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (detail in Litde, 
Taoism and the arts of China , 236). 

The present text does not begin with the scripture proper. What we have first are 
the usual formulas for the purification of the mind and the mouth, followed by those 
for the body, for the pacification of the God of the Earth (who might be frightened by 
the sudden outburst of cosmic responses caused by the recitation), for the purification 
of the sacred area, and so on. Then there are the solemn Precious Announcements 
( baogao ff a* ), also known as Precious Titles ( baohao iff), one for each of the Three 
Officials. These onomastic formulations contain not only the canonical titles of the 
gods, but also list their many attributes, as well as, in some cases, elements of their 
hagiography. 

The actual scripture opens on page 5a. It decribes in sequence the divine powers and 
functions of the Three Officials, and the merits to be gained from their veneration. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Franke, “Bemerkungen zum volkstiimlichen Taoismus der Ming-Zeit.” 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang yuanyang shangdi wushi tianzun shuo huoche Wang lingguan 

zhengjing±±Ji^±^m^n^.'X^m^mm 

12 fols. 

Ming dynasty (1368-1644)? 

1443 (fasc. 1063) 

“True Book Spoken by the Supreme Ancestor Most High Original Yang, the 
Heavenly Worthy without Beginning, on the Divine Officer Wang of Chariots of 
Fire.” Wang lingguan zESHT is a powerful exorcist deity of modern Taoism (see 1220 
Daofa huiyuan 141-43), being the incarnation of one of the fiery stars of the Southern 
Dipper (Nandou 4 -). Fire chariots were an offensive weapon in traditional Chinese 
warfare. Wang lingguan hurls these burning vehicles at malevolent spirits that have 
incurred his wrath. He also is the guardian spirit of Taoist monasteries. 

The legend of Wang lingguan’s conversion to Taoism by the zhenren Sa Shoujian 
HtF 1? (see 297 Lishi zhenxian tidao tongjian xubian 4.ia-3a) is well known in popular 



[ 1228 ] 3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults 

literature and drama. The legend is here referred to on pages 2a-3b. Most of the subse- 
quent scripture is in five-syllable verse, in the style of Ming popular “precious scrolls” 
(baojuan 

Kristofer Schipper 

Tuanshi tianzun sbuo yaowang jiu bashiyi nan zhenjing 

8 fols. 

1444 (fasc. 1063) 

“True Scripture on Deliverance from the Eighty-one Difficulties by the King of 
Medecine.” Revealed by the Heavenly Worthy of Primordial Beginning in the Daluo 
^ jH heaven, this text consists primarily of a litany of the Eighty-one Difficulties from 
which the King of Medicine, Bian Que JUSt, can save the reciter. The faithful may 
also ask a Taoist to recite the text for them. It is further recommended that one keep 
the book at home or even carry it on one’s person. 

The Eighty-one Difficulties of the title have nothing in common with the medical 
work of that name (see 1024 Huang di bashiyi nanjing zuantu jujie). 

John Lagerwey 

Bixia yuanjun huguo bimin puji baosheng miaojing 

8 fols. 

1445 (fasc. 1063) 

“Scripture of the Lady of the Clouds of Dawn, for the Protection of the State and 
the Succor of the People, and for the Salvation of All Creatures.” In response to the 
question of one Yuluo M If , the Heavenly Worthy of Primordial Beginning explains 
how the Lady of the Clouds of Dawn came “to transform herself into a woman in 
order to save all creatures.” Born on the eighteenth day of the fourth month, she “re- 
vealed her compassionate face on Taishan.” Her merits on Earth were such that the 
Jade Emperor set her at the head of the soldiers of the Eastern Peak and charged her 
with the inspection of human behavior. 

A lengthy discussion of the system of moral causality follows this account, ending 
with a “divine formula” of the tale of the Lady that frees people from the consequences 
of their sins in previous lives. Yuluo urges believers to invite a Taoist who keeps “the 
pure commandments” (qingjie daoshi (if ftK if! i ) to recite this book for them. 

The Precious Tide ( baogao If In ) of the Lady is given at the end of the text. 

John Lagerwey 



3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults [ 1229 ] 

Taishang dasheng tangling shangjiang huguo miaojing 

2 fols. 

1446 (fasc. 1065) 

“Marvelous Scripture on the Saindy General Protector of the Nation.” The “great 
saint and commander-in-chieP of the tide is Guan Yu MM, called here Chongning 
zhenjun Sp y!| U . He “protects the country” and “promotes peace” with the soldiers 
entrusted to his charge by the Jade Emperor. The enumeration of his military forces 
in an incantation forms the core of the present text. One of the opening enumerations 
ends with the mendon of “those who obtained the Tao on Mount Yuquan 3 £ |i| .” 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang laojun shuo chenghuang ganying xiaozai jifu miaojing 

asMiwe 

5 fols. 

1447 (fasc. 1063) 

“Scripture Proffered by the Most High Lord Lao concerning the City God’s Effica- 
cy in Averting Catastrophes and Increasing Good Fortune.” The administrative system 
described in this punctuated text is that of the Ming (1368-1644). The scripture begins 
with Taishang laojun vaunting the powers of the god of the capital city. 

Then a zhenren pays homage to the city gods of all levels, as well as to their assistants, 
the “censors” {panguan !(| ). Moved, the god of the capital promises his assistance 

to whoever recites this book. Laojun provides a calendar for such recitations. 

This work is also known by the tide 1447b Huguo baoning yousheng wang weiling 
gong ganying chenghuang jing, based on the declaration of the capital god in the ap- 
pendix (5b). 

John Lagerwey 

Taishang dongxuan lingbao Wuxian guan Huaguang benxing miaojing 

9 fols. 

1448 (fasc. 1063) 

“Wonderful Lingbao Scripture on the Origin of the Wuxian [Ling] Guan and [the 
Bodhisattva] Huaguang.” This tide is, after 206 Wuxian lingguan dadi dengyi and 1192 
Dahui jingci miaoluo tianzun shuo fade Wush eng jing (q.v.), the third document for 
the integration of die Wuxian into the Taoist pantheon. Unlike its companion texts, 
the work shows a distinct Buddhist tinge. It mentions various manifestations of the 
five heavenly marshals (among others, as Jixiang rulai cf. the Ming novel 

Nanyouji j^j JSIfH 1), but expressly confirms their identity with Huaguang pusa, who, 



[ 1230 ] 3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults 



3. B.14 Other Popular Cults [1231] 



like the Wuxian, was still vehemently opposed by the Taoists as late as the thirteenth 
century (see “Wen taibao zhuan buyi,” 780 Diqi shangjiang Wen taibao zhuan ib-2b). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Cedzich, “The cult of Wu-tiung.” 

Ursula- Angelika Cedzich 

3.B.14.b The Cult of the Northern Dipper 

Beidou zhifa wuwei jing 

8 fols. 

870 (fasc. 579) 

“Scripture of Martial Power, of the Method of Government of the Northern Dip- 
per.” This book is said to have been transmitted by the Mysterious Woman of the Nine 
Heavens (Jiutian xuannii 4444 ) to a man named Yuan Qing JH'/jf , who served 
as an official in Luoyang in the first years of the Tang dynasty (618-907). Yuan helped 
pacify the empire by means of the method described here and was granted the title of 
left chancellor of the Mobile Administration (xingtai zuo puye fj -J| tL ift 14 ; ia-b). The 
story is reminiscent of that of the famous diviner of the same period. Yuan Tiangang 
It 4fM, to whom it may allude (see Siku qumshu zongmu tiyao 111.2298, Jiu Tang shu 
191.5092-94, Taiping guangji 221.1694-97). 

The first part of the book (2a-jb) contains astrological information related to the 
nine stars of the Dipper and to the Twenty-eight Stellar Mansions. The second part 
(5b-8a) describes a method of warfare ( bingfa ), in particular a rite of “Pacing 
the Mainstay” ( bugang P'M\) by means of which the seventh star of the Dipper, Tian- 
gang pojun is pointed in the direction of threatening dangers. The rite is 

accompanied by an incantation entided “Tiangang shenzhou 4 21 W /c which is 
closely related to the “Beidou zhou 4 1 ^f- ” of the Book of the Dipper, the Beidou jing 

4 t 4 H (see 622 Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansheng zhenjing 6a). According to 
the commentary of Fu Dongzhen fHPIOt, this incantation derives from the Tianxin 
zhcngfa 4 ' L lE 4 (752 Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansheng jing zhu 2.23a), and 
in fact we find in $66 Shangqing tianxin zhengfa both a version identical to that of the 
Beidou jing (4.i8b-i9a), and a version closer to that of the present book (7.2b). 

Poul Andersen 



Tuqing wushang lingbao ziran beidou bensheng zhenjing 

4 fols. 

45 (fasc. 29) 

“True and Unsurpassed Lingbao Scripture from the Yuqing Heaven on the Spon- 
taneous Origin of the Northern Dipper.” This work was transmitted, according to 
its subtitle, by Baoming da tiandi IS fm 4 4 '$T ■ It deals with the origin of the stellar 
deities of the Beidou in the frame of a revelation to Baoshang zhenren W _h R A by 
Yuanshi dadi 7 tl$n 4 '$r (also called Taiji zhenzun 4 fl! 6tl). While the goddess Zi- 
guang furen ^4 2:44 is bathing, nine lotus blossoms unfold, from which Tianhuang 
dadi 4Jtl4'Sr, Ziwei dadi 4 4, and the other seven stars of the constellation 
are born. 

The recitation of the text, alternatively named Scripture of the Nine Luminaries 
( Jiuguang zhenjing 4461 ?), is recommended for the first day of the New Year, in 
connection with an Offering to the Nine Luminaries (Jiuguang jiao 

This work is cited in 1167 Taishang g any ingpian 29.3b (commentary of Li Changling 
and 752 Taishang xuanling beidou benming yansheng jing zhu 2.i9a-2oa (com- 
mentary of Fu Dongzhen fH 41 6 )• 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

Tuqing taiyuan neiyang zhenjing 4 ftf Up ft 4 ft 6 I? 

3 fols. 

63 (fasc. 32) 

“True Scripture of the Yuqing Heaven on Internally Nourishing the Original Em- 
bryonic State.” This scripture was transmitted, as it is said, by Yuantai zhenjun jtM 
64 (a name mentioned in 42 Tuqing yuanshi xuanhuang jiuguang zhenjing 2b). It 
contains Yuanshi shangdi’s instruction to propagate methods for restoring one’s origi- 
nal vital forces, which consist in enriching one’s immanent qi with the cosmic “true 
spirit.” In terms of individual practice, this means concentration of the mind (dingxin 
4 : 4 ), shutting out external distractions (like alcohol, sex), as well as restriction of the 
inner ambitions and thoughts. By observing first the small and eventually the great 
precepts ( xiaojie , dajie 4 ft£ 4 ft£), the adept finally attains the state of nonacting. By 
multiplying their persons ( fenshen 44 ), Taishang laojun and Ziguang tianmu ‘jpjt 
4® ensure the diffusion of the scripture and the salvation of innumerable beings, 
who, for their part, promise in a hymn to continue the work of salvation (see also 64 
Tuqing wushang neijing zhenjing). 



Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 




[ 1232 ] 3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults 

Yuqing yuanshi xuanhuang jiuguang zhenjing 3 £ ?rf sti Jl jt iJt I? 

4 fols. 

Ming dynasty (1368-1644)? 

42 (fasc. 29) 

“True Scripture of the Yuqing Heaven on the Nine Luminaries of Primordial Black 
and Yellow.” Although the term “Nine Luminaries” is not used in this text, it undoubt- 
edly refers to the Nine Heavens and to the saints of these heavens who recite this 
scripture (2a). The text itself is referred to as a “sacred text [made by the mixture] of 
yellow and black [xucmhucmg yuwen £ jlf 3 E £ ; ia].” Its recitation leads “to the union 
of vital breath and the spirits.” 

The brief but dense text appears to be the product of mediumistic writing, for in 
the Taoist ritual described at the end— reference is even made to the “lighting of the 
incense burner [falu f£M]”— the revealing divinity descends to add (jiangyue 0) 
to “my sacred text” ( woyujing 31 ) a “secret formula” which the Heavenly Worthy 
of Primordial Beginning is said to have used of old in order “to save all the Powers.” 
The recitation of the text in “300-odd characters” replaces the recitation of the “great 
books in more than 260 juan ,” and that of the final formula enables one “to live forever 
in Jade Purity.” This formula is said to be an order of the Primordial Beginning himself 
and of the Saintly Lord of Pilu zhena JUStUSS yElSii: it “orders the unification of 
the two religions.” 

John Lagerwey 

Yuqing wushang neijing zhenjing 3 £ jjf _h 0 H lit If 

2 fols. 

64 (fasc. 32) 

“True Scripture from the Yuqing Heaven on the Supreme Inner Landscape.” This 
scripture was transmitted, like 644 Taishang neidan shouyi zhending jing, by the god- 
dess Ziguang tianmu (on whom see 4s Yuqing wushang lingbao ziran beidou 

bensheng zhenjing). The scripture treats the creation by Yuanshi zhizhen dasheng jt 
31 ^ 11 ? of the external images in the Brahma heaven as symbols of the Inner 
Landscape and the differentiation of the pneumata of the Five Directions and their 
divinities in correspondence to the five organs of the human body. As a result, the 
Inner Alchemical process can be started and completed. The restriction of the senses 
(jie ft!c) and mental concentration (ding /g) lead to wisdom (zhi ), or in other 
words, “inner illumination through reversed contemplation” ( fanguan neizhao 

At the same time, the revelation of the scripture symbolizes the enlightenment 
resulting from the completion of the process. Yuanshi’s rays of light evoke the awaken- 
ing of the original mind ( benxin ^'L'). In the empty darkness of the Yuqing heaven, 



3.B.14 Other Popular Cults [ 1233 ] 

the moon (symbol of Ziguang mu) appears, and in it, in the midst of a purple pneuma, 
the newborn, who praises the teaching once more in a gdthd. 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

Taishang neidan shouyi zhending jing h 0 FJ '<f |R /I: 1 ? 

1 fol. 

644 (fasc. 342) 

“Supreme Neidan Scripture on Tme Concentration and Holding the One.” This 
scripture was transmitted by the Celestial Empress Purple Radiance (Ziguang tianhou 
cf. 4s Yuqing wushang lingbao ziran beidou bensheng zhenjing). The brief 
work resembles 64 Yuqing wushang neijing zhenjing transmitted by the same goddess. 
It recommends and expounds spiritual concentration ( dingshen J$), which along 

with respiratory regulations (yuqi MUi), enables the adept to Hold the One (shouyi 
Tf— -), thus forming the basis for the Inner Alchemical process (neidan f*J j 3 ). 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 

Taishang yuanshi tianzun shuo Bao yueguang huanghou shengmu tianzun 
kongque mingwangjing^±.jt^h^.^^.^H 
34 fols. 

1433 (fasc. 1058) 

Shengmu kongque mingwang zunjing qibo yi H ?L l£ IE @ fl ffi 

23 fols. 

1434 (fasc. 1058) 

Taishang yuanshi tianzun shuo kongque jing bowen il 7 £ f Lifi ® 

21 fols. 

1435 (fasc. 1058) 

The three titles “Scripture of the Empress of Precious Moonlight, Heavenly Wor- 
thy Holy Mother and Luminous Peacock Queen, Pronounced by Taishang Yuanshi 
Tianzun,” “Ritual of Invocation of the Venerable Scripture of the Holy Mother and 
Luminous Peacock Queen,” and “Text of Invocation of the Peacock Scripture, Pro- 
nounced by Taishang Yuanshi Tianzun” represent the headings of three juan of a single 
work: a scripture to be recited within a complete ritual including invocations, litanies, 
and an offering. 

According to a colophon preceding Zhang Guoxiang’s 'jfl imprimatur of 
1607, this Buddho-Taoist text was found by the superintendant Li tidian ^ SUfi of 
the Zixiao gong JK temple on Wudang shan Jti; mill- Recovered from a nearby 
grotto and kept in the temple since, the scripture was appended to a copy of the Duren 



[ 1234 ] 3 . B. 1 4 Other Popular Cults 



3.B.14 Other Popular Cults [ 123 s ] 



jing ® AIM in eighty-five juan. Possibly its discoverer was Li Youyan who, 

together with Hu Guya #1 "S' H , was appointed to the office of the superintendant in 
1413 (gs9 Da Ming xuantiem shangdi ruiying tulu 5a-b). 

In its present form, the work certainly dates no earlier than the Ming dynasty (1368- 
1644), as is suggested by the folk tunes (“Caicha ge or “Qingjiang yin df '/L 

[ ”) prescribed for the ritual, and especially the name of a dragon deity, Da Mingguo 
zhongping da longwang A B4 HI A A Alii (i43S Kongque jing baiwen 6b) . A refer- 
ence to the dragon deities of a Kongque jing is also found in the commentary 

to 7S4 Taishang shuo Xuantian dasheng zbenwu benzhuan shenzhou miaojing 2.14b. 

The goddess at the center of this ritual for controllings H magic and bewitch- 
ments is a fusion of Mahamayurl-vidyarajnl, mother of the Buddha, who plays a sig- 
nificant role in Buddhism and especially in Tantrism, with the Taoist Bao yueguang 
huanghou jf j=J A JUn, mother of the Jade Emperor (see 10 Gaoshang yuhuang ben- 
xing jijing i.5a-6b). Among the other deities invoked are the hosts of female rdksasas 
(1 luoeba nii HA A), nagas ( longwang ft I, longnii ft A), and daughters of Maya 
( moye nii Mill A), the traditional divinities of the thirty-two heavens and twenty- 
eight stellar constellations invoked. Thus the equivalence of Buddhism and Taoism is 
consciously emphasized (see, e.g., 143s Kongque jing bowen 2a). 

A 1551 edition of a comparable Buddhist work entitled Kongque zunjing keyi -fL A 
is found in Dai Nihon Zokuzokyo 2. 

Ursula- Angelika Cedzich 

Xiantian doumu zougao xuanke A A A S HA A 14 

18 fols. 

1452 (fasc. 1064) 

“Prayer Mystery Ritual of the Mother of the Bushel of Former Heaven.” The deity 
invoked in this scripture, the Mother of the Bushel, is Marlci (Molizhi Jp f IJ A ), 
Queen of Heaven of Purple Glow (Ziguang tianhou ^ A A /n ), a goddess ofTantric 
origin who has been popular in China since late Tang times (618-907). She acquired 
a Taoist form as Dasheng yuanming daomu tianzun A i? [Ml []fl jit O A $ ( on these 
titles, see pages 2b and 12b). In the present ritual, she is visualized in meditation and 
worshiped. 

Accompanying the meditation, a number of pseudo-Sanskrit mantra are pro- 
nounced (iob-i2a). A general invocation of gods, saints, and patriarchs precedes the 
worship of Marlci. Among the patriarchs invoked, we find on page 3b the name of Mo 
Yueding J| 41 fff (1226-1293), which suggests that the ritual is of Yuan (1279-1368) or, 
more probably, Ming (1368-1644) date. 

Kristofer Schipper 



Sanguang zhuling zifu yanshou miaojing n A ££ tn IS ?§ M M t & IS 

I fol. 

20 (fasc. 25) 

“Scripture on the Improvement of Fate and Prolongation of Life [Thanks to] the 
Influence of the Three Luminaries.” This very brief text encourages adepts to live 
on a sacred mountain in order to avoid the diversions of the senses. Thus, one may 
devote oneself to the absorption of the Liquified Gold ( jinyi jfe W . ) and the cyclically 
transformed elixir ( huandan J 4 )• By so doing, one benefits from the nourishment 

of the spontaneous qi of the Three Luminaries and from the protection of the Seven 
Mechanisms (ji $£) of the Northern Dipper. 

John Lagerwey 

3.B.14.C Popular Rites 

Taishang xiaozai qifu jiaoyi A A 4=LA -?S Si fH 

II fols. 

810 (fasc. 566) 

“Ritual of the Offering of the Most High for Dispersing Calamity and Praying for 
Blessing.” This ritual may be dated after 1117, as it refers to Taihuang wanffi zhenjun 
Allll^ytii (sa-b), the deity who transmitted the secrets of the Shenxiao 14 4 r 
tradition to Lin Lingsu (cf. 1219 Gaoshang shenxiao yuqing zhenwang zishu dafa ib). 
Indeed, the names of the other deities cited are reminiscent of those of the nine Shen- 
xiao masters (cf. 1219 Zishu dafa i.i8a-b), and the ritual may belong to that tradition. 
However, the text is also quite similar to 807 Tianxin zhengfa xiuzhen daochang shejiao 
yi. The initial “Weiling zhou $rl!/u” of both texts is the extensive version, derived 
originally from 330 Taishang dongxuan lingbao zhenwen yaojie shangjing 6a-7a, and the 
“exteriorization of the officials” ( chuguan of the present ritual (3a-4a) is iden- 

tical with the first part of the chuguan in 807 Daochang shejiao yi. A difference between 
the two rituals is in the form of the consecration of the incense-burner (falu #ftt), 
where the present ritual has a short version with no reference to the local earth-deities 
(2b-3a). 

Poul Andersen 

Taishang bifa zhenzhai lingfu 

21 fols. 

Ming (1318-1644)? 

86 (fasc. 37) 

“Powerful Talismans for Stabilizing the Home.” This is a popular book with charms 
for domestic use: to avert harmful happenings such as pigs eating their litter, money 




[ 1236 ] 3 .B. 14 Other Popular Cults 



3 . B . 1 4 Other Popular Cults [ 1237 ] 



fleeing the house, poltergeists, neighborly slander, baleful stars, hobgoblins, and so 
on. There are no accompanying spells or documents. 

A short text at the beginning relates an anecdote about Emperor Wen of the Han 
dynasty, who, when taking a walk in the district of Hongnong 'JL HI (Lingbao hsien 

M It M ), discovered an ill-sited house that should have brought great distress upon its 
inhabitants. The latter, however, were prosperous, thanks to the present book, given 
to them by two young boys, who in fact were the gods of the Northern and Southern 
Dippers. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Dongxuan lingbao wuyue guben zhenxing 

27 fols. 

Attributed to Dongfang Shuo iff fj (145-93 B.c.). Ming dynasty (1368-1644)? 

441 (fasc. 197) 

“Old Version of the Chart of the True Form of the Five Peaks.” This is a modern 
version of the ancient protective talismans mentioned by Ge Hong and found in 292 
Han Wudi neizhuan. The legends and rituals connected to the ancient versions are all 
assembled in 1281 Wuyue zhenxing xulun (q.v.). As the “old version,” this text presents 
itself as a register ( lu H) of the lords of the Five Peaks and the four accessory holy 
mountains (Qingcheng shan flf$clll, Lushan Mill, Huoshan gill, and Qianshan 
Iff ill ) and their subalterns. (See fig. 77.) 

After a preface attributed, in the tradition of the Han Wudi neizhuan and S98 Shi- 
zhouji , to Dongfang Shuo, the text presents the rulers of the holy mountains, their 
servants, and their outward appearance (e.g., clothes, attributes). The documents for 
the ritual for the transmission of the register are also given (4b-sb), imitating the old 
models. The talismans themselves are partly of the well-known “archaic sealscripfi” 
kind, and party of the “geological map” type. The latter were studied for the first time 
by Inoue (“Gogaku shinkei zu ni tsuite”), in comparison with modern geographical 
maps. In fact, these drawings correspond to outlines for so-called lamp maps ( dengtu 
M HI )• These outlines were used in requiem services of the modern liandu If ) g kind. 
They were copied on a flat surface, and lamps were placed at given spots. Then the 
officiants would walk on these diagrams according to a ritual pattern, thus “inspect- 
ing” die holy mountains and retrieving the souls imprisoned in them (see Schipper, 
“Gogaku shinkei zu no shinko”). These liturgical diagrams are used here for antiquar- 
ian purposes. 

Kristofer Schipper 




figure 77. Mount Taishan ( 441 17b-i8a). Ming reprint of 1598. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
nationale de France. (Chinois 954.6/438) 



Jiutian shangsheng bizhuan jinfu jing ft _t $ % f$ IS 

14 fols. 

1267 (fasc. 1002) 

“Book of the Golden Talisman Secretly Transmitted by the Supreme Saint of the 
Nine Heavens.” This work is a short hemerological treatise for popular use. It belongs 
to the “Three Origins and Nine Stars” ( sanyuanjiuxing H ft tl M ) tradition and prob- 
ably dates from a period no earlier than the late Song (960-1279). The first part of the 
title refers to an earlier work repeatedly quoted in the text as Jinfu jing (7b) or Jinjing 
(ia, ib). 

The present text can be divided into a short introduction devoid of factual elements 
(ia-b) and three main parts. The first part (ib-7b) deals with the mantic values of the 
nine stars and their distribution among the sexagesimal binoms of the days. The names 
of the stars are totally different from those in common use. The second part (7b-na) 
discusses the mantic values of the generals of the Three Origins (sanyuan jiangjun H 
jty&W) and their distribution among the days of each month. The system is placed 
under the aegis of Zhuge Liang MM ft. - The text ends with more general notions of 
calendrology (nb-i4a). 



More Kalinowski 



[ 123 $ ] 3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults 



3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults [ 1239 ] 



Tianhuang taiyi shenlii bihui ji ng A ^ A “ ^ ® Wi @ 

2 fols. 

1268 (fasc. 1002) 

“Book of Maleficences to be Avoided, According to the Divine Prescriptions of the 
Celestial Sovereign of Great Unity.” This is a brief exposition of the interdictions con- 
cerning space and time and pertaining to alchemical work. The author gathered them 
in twelve categories of maleficences ( shier hui The contents are somewhat 

meager and obviously date from a late period. The text is in fact an appendix to 1267 
Jiutian shangsheng bizhuan jinfu jing. 

Mure Kalinowski 

Taishang dengzhen sanjiao lingyingjing 

7 fols. 

Song dynasty (960-1279)? 

286 (fasc. 136) 

“Scripture on the Ascent to Truth and the Magic Efficacy of the Three Nimble 
Movements.” The text describes three minor rituals for the visualization of the deer, 
tiger, and dragon, of which the adept can avail himself in order to move at will across 
the earth and through the air. These techniques depend on the use of the Jade Emper- 
or’s seal (Yudi yin 3 £ AA )• The text concludes by explaining in detail how to make 
this seal. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Kaltenmark, “Un precede de vol magique.” 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 

Taishang laojun shuo jiusheng zhenjing A HU? 

2 fols. 

630 (fasc. 341) 

‘True Scripture for Saving Life, Spoken by Taishang Laojun.” In this brief scrip- 
ture the provenance of which is unknown, but which was probably intended for lay- 
believers, Taishang laojun orders the divinities of the six cyclical jia Ep and 

ding T combinations (liujia A PP , liuding A T ) to keep devotees from harm and to 
ensure their well-being. It is recommended that believers recite the text seven times 
to thirty-seven and to copy it by hand. 

Hans-Hermann Schmidt 



Guiguzi tiansui lingwen & tT A A M M A 

2 juan 

Southern Song (1127-1279) or later 

867 (fasc. 579) 

“Numinous Writ of the Essence of Heaven, by Master Guigu.” The book defines 
itself as “the secret celestial writ” (bimi tianwen % A A) of Guigu zi, the master of 
the Waterfall Cave, Shuilian dong zhu A p] i (i.ia-b, 6b). The opening passage 
confirms that the author of 102s Guigu zi is intended, but the present book is otherwise 
unrelated to that text. 

The book is not likely to be earlier than the Southern Song dynasty. Note, for 
instance, the mention of the Black Killer, Heisha jiangjun (2.16a; cf. 128s 

Yisheng baode zhuan ), and the list of deities on page 1.5a, which seems to reflect the 
Shenxiao pantheon (see 1219 Gaoshang shenxiao yuqing zhenwang zishu dafa 1.18a). The 
work contains a mixture of minor methods for the cultivation of immortality— includ- 
ing instructions for the inner circulation of qi (i.5b-6a) and recipes for the preparation 
of pills— as well as exorcistic methods based on the use of fu and seals. In an effort to 
legitimize these methods, references are made to a line of transmission that includes 
several of the immortals of the Shangqing tradition (i.iib-i3a). However, the book is 
intended for the use of people living in the world, and of both sexes ( zaishi ntmnii A 
tS H A ; 1.2a), and the practitioner is described in several places as having the appear- 
ance of a popular exorcist, performing barefooted and with loosened hair, and using 
techniques such as biting the tongue and spurting the blood out (see, e.g., 2.ia-b). 
Note also the inclusion of a version of the divinatory technique based on the use of 
the Sanjia fit and the Tongmufu JS [=} (cf. the versions in 589 Taishang chi- 

wen dongshen sanlu i7b-22a and 860 Shangqing zhenyuan rongling jing i6a-i7a), here 
opening with the summoning of the judges and guards of hell, who are called upon 
to protect the altar (i.i7b-2ib). 

Poul Andersen 

Yuanyang zi wujia lun 

5 fols. 

864 (fasc. 578) 

‘Treatise on the Five Simulations, by Master Yuanyang.” A postscript to this book 
(ja-b) attributes its methods to Yuanyang zi from Changbo shan M fi ll R A- Several 
alchemical works in the Daozang , including a commentary to the Cantong qi # [n] 
found in iouDaoshu 34, are attributed to this figure (see CGF 287-88 and VDL 72, 118, 
119, 163). The contents of the present book, however, are unrelated to these alchemical 
writings. 



f 1240 ] 3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults 

The method of Five Simulations ( wujia fa fife ) is here described as a way of 

avoiding danger by separating oneself from the body ( fenshen In the presence 

of evil influences, one may grasp an object and make one’s body enter it, or one may 
unite the body with one of the elements. In both cases, one becomes invisible and is 
at liberty to leave on a spiritual journey. Other, and generally simpler, versions of the 
method are found in several Song dynasty (960-1279) texts (see, e.g., Taishang chi- 
wen dongshen sanlu ioa-nb, 8ss Taiqing jinque yuhua xianshu baji shenzhang sanhuang 
neibi wen 3.7a-i3a, 8s8 Taishang dongshen xuanmiao boyuan zhenjing iob-i3a, and 867 
Guigu zi tiansui lingwen 1.8b— 11b). In style and content, the present version is similar 
to that found in 867 Tiansui lingwen , and it seems likely that they belong to the same 
period. 

Paul Andersen 

Kuigang liusuo bifa !tt A $$ ffl fife 

8 fols. 

582 (fasc. 323) 

“Secret Methods of the Six Locks of the Dipper Constellation.” This is a short text 
with instructions on how to provoke cosmic changes, by abolishing day and night, 
provoking black gales and yellow sandstorms and other apocalyptic phenomena. 
These cataclysms are obtained through the use of a Spell of the Heavenly Chaos 
(“Huntian zhou and other magic means. There is a list of the Thirty-two 

Heavens, which appears with pseudo-Buddhist names. Some of the spells are in 
pseudo-Sanskrit. The text is undatable. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang sanbi wujie bifa A _h H Jnf fi MfSUx 

13 fols. 

583 (fasc. 323) 

“Secret Methods for the Three Evasions and Five Liberations.” Following the title, 
a subtitle in small characters reads: “A Correct Way to Reach Immortality, Consisting 
of Eight Methods to Hide in the Earth, by the Great Official of Chu @ A AHItfe A 

iiflijIEiti” The methods of evading this world cause the spririts to leave the body, 
and enable one to liberate oneself through feigned death, leaving behind a substitute 
body (shijie f'M)- The simulacrum may look like a corpse, but it is in fact a substitute 
object. Alternatively, one may practice the “hidden period” ( dunjia Ep ) magic to 

vanish or travel to other places. One of the other ways to make oneself invisible is to 
make use of a “heavenly garment” ( tianyi A A) made of the placenta of a male baby. 
This “garment” has been dried and then inscribed with a talisman, and it will enable 



3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults [ 124-1 ] 

its wearer to be invisible at will. This text could be of almost any period, except for 
some modern colloquialisms (e.g., “ yigeyue — -f@ H ; 2bi). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Dadong jing jixiang shenzhou fa A jfi'lfj? 

6 fols. 

1461 (fasc. 1064) 

“Method of the Auspicious Divine Spell of the Great Cavern Scripture.” This is a 
magical formula aiming at conjuring auspicious forces. The formula for their mani- 
festation is constructed around the phrase “Jixiang tanchijun pf repeated 

one hundred times. The expression tanchijun corresponds to a sound originally pro- 
duced by the Yuanshi tianwang A£n AS that contains the entire True Great Cavern 
Scripture ( Dadong zhenjing The formula is explained in a commentary and 

illustration by Wei Qi jfjf^ , in his 103 Tuqing wuji zongzhen Wenchang dadong xianjing 
zhu 1.22b (dated 1309). The image depicts various kinds of musical instruments, and 
the surrounding commentary explains the meaning of the three syllables of the spell. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Shangqing liujia qidao bifa h in A *?* fllf VLff 

10 fols. 

584 (fasc. 323) 

“Secret Shangqing Method for Invoking the Six Jia.” This is a small ritual centered 
on the cult of the decade spirits of the sexagesimal cycle, the six jia and the six 

spirits of the fourth day (ding T)- 

The account of the work’s transmission (ia-b) relates that the Liujia tianshu A S A 
U in three juan that constitutes the basis of this ritual was instituted upon the return 
of Xuanyuan laojun A ft ^ ft to the Taiqing gong A fit temple. It may be assumed 

that the arrangement of the present work is not earlier than the Tang. It differs from 
other compilations of the same type in that the decade spirits here are associated with 
unusual female deities: the five Nayan tiannii A A and the twelve Xinii A- 

Marc Kalinowski 

Taiyi yuanzhen baoming changsheng jing A A A R fife w ft A. £? 

2 fols. 

46 (fasc. 29) 

“Scripture on Guarding Vitality and Extending Life.” The core of this text revealed 
by Taiyi yuanzhen A A A lit is an incantation, the recitation of which, followed by 
visualizations and the circulation of the vital qi and the spirit, ensures “the protection 
of your original life force” (baoming fife np ) and even “eternal life” (changsheng MS). 



» 




[ 1242 ] 3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults 



3. B.14 Other Popular Cults [ 1243 ] 



The core scripture is enclosed in cosmological and liturgical wrappings. At the end 
of the text, mention is made of a Taiyi shengzhen jing $M, which is said to 

contain the instructions for the use of this book in a ritual setting in which statues are 
cast ofTaiyi and sixteen zhenren. The book must only be transmitted to serious adepts, 
on “an altar of the covenant” (mengtan §1 12). 

John Lagerwcy 



Tuqing shanggong ke taizhen wen 3£ ?1f t Hf J4 R SC 

25 fols. 

Ming dynasty (1368-1644)? 

1408 (fasc. 1052) 

“Writs of the Most True Ones, [according to] the Standard of High Palaces in the 
Jade Pure [Heaven].” This text combines a set of rules for conduct in the mode of the 
Standards for Merit and Demerit (gongguoge with a “register” of gods and 

saints. 

The Taizhen ke is an important ancient code of the early Heavenly Master 

church (see 61s Chisongzi zhangli). It was adapted by the Shangqing _h ilf scriptures 
into a code for the transmission of texts (see 184 Taizhen yudi siji mingke jing 
'fffPftoS The present code is entirely different and clearly intended for the 

laity. 

Although since medieval times there had been a strong connection between rules 
of conduct and registers— the observance of the former conditioning the authority to 
utilize the latter— this is not truly an ordination document. The register lists the names 
of the lords of the Thirty-two Heavens, together with their “taboo names” written 
in “cloud sealscript” (yunzhuan MWi)- Next come eighteen of the highest Heavenly 
Worthies, all hypostases of the Tao, among which in the first place was the Yuanshi 
tianzun jt % but also Guanshiyin ej (Avalokitesvara; see 11b and 12a). 
Later names of heavenly rulers also have distict Buddhist connotations. 

Kristofer Schipper 



Xuanpu shan lingqin bilu ffl lU It 11 
3 juan 

Preface by Huangfu Peng JiL Nf MH ; traditionally dated to the Tang period (618- 
907) 

580 (fasc. 322) 

“Secret Register of the Golden Casket from the Mysterious Garden Mountain.” 
This is a small compendium of magical arts, based on talismans and pseudo-Sanskrit 
spells. Mudras (xuanyin SEP) and vajrapdni ^ffll], called “Brahma gods” (Janshen 
z£$1) are also mentioned. The introduction gives a detailed but fantastic account 






of the transmission of the work. A certain 
Xiapi xiansheng “obtained it on 

Taishan.” This must be Laozi, inasmuch as 
the Great Sage appeared during the reign of 
Qin Shi huangdi of Xiapi shan (see 1483 Tian- 
huang zhidao taiqing yuci 1.28b). The sage 
transmitted it to Zhang Liang 36 (d. 187 

b.c.), the celebrated Han general. From here 
it passed through many other semihistorical 
or legendary persons up to a certain Zhang 
Jing 36 la, said to be a descendant of the 
Heavenly Masters on Longhu shan || 1 % li| . 
The methods explained here should therefore 
be seen as belonging to the Heavenly Master 
tradition. The author of the preface, Huang- 
fu Peng, retired from his post as prefect of 
Xunyang 'M pj§ , Jiangxi, and returned to Chang’an. There he met one day a stranger 
by the name of Lin Ziyao ^ , who was able to walk on water and who gave him 
these ancient methods. Both Huangfu and Lin loved wine, and many of the magical 
arts call for the use of this ingredient. The preface is dated from the first year of the 
“Zhoutong |S] )§” era. This may be a graphic error for Xiantong /nKjf! (860-874). In 
any case, the date must be considered ficticious. The work is mentioned under the title 
Xuanpu shan lingjin dafa £ HUl-I M '/£ in 1483 Taiqing yuci 3.29b-3oa, together 
with a table of contents that makes the identification certain. 

The Mysterious Garden mountain is another name for the holy Kunlun mountain, 
Xuanpu, the dwelling place of a god named Xutuo dijun ® H . Under this deity 
are twenty-four generals, corresponding to the twenty-four energy nodes ( jieqi fflM,)- 
The methods of invoking and employing these deities are given on pages i.5a-i7a. 
Next follow twenty-four magical methods, eight in each juan. Those of juan 1 concern 
the mastery of the elements (wind, rain, and so forth). Juan 2 is devoted to warfare. 
Juan 3 has different magical arts, like becoming invisible or transmitting messages to 
others through dreams. At the end of the work there is a supplement (bieji JjlJ M ) that 
includes a drawing of the Xuanpu shan for ritual use (fig. 78). 

Tuan Bingling 




if 

tD 



figure 78. Map of Mount Xuanpu 
(sSo 3.16a) 



1 




[ 1244 ] 3. B. 14 Other Popular Cults 



3.B. 14 Other Popular Cults [ 124s ] 



Taishang jingui yujing yansheng dongxuan zhuyou chan 

12 fols. 

Song dynasty (960-1279)? 

811 (fasc. 566) 

“Jade Mirror in the Golden Casket and Torch in the Darkness of the Cavern of 
Mystery.” This litany is a hybrid text of uncertain antecedents, proposing a short ritual 
of purification and atonement for individual use. A preface by a Xuyi zhenren £§ — flt 
A reveals that this is a scripture in three juan with three different titles (two of which 
are incorporated in the present tide). Before its recitation, the adept must bathe and 
fast. A ritual for this bathing ( muyu j# ) in perfumed water is included in the present 

text (9a-iob). 

Kristofer Schipper 

Tianlao shenguang jing 

15 fols. 

Attributed to Li Jing (571-649) 

866 (fasc. 578) 

“Scripture of the Divine Light of the Celestial Elder.” The Celestial Elder, Tianlao 
is a minister of the Yellow Emperor, who according to legend was particularly 
knowledgeable about omens, divination, and the arts of war (see Xuanyuan benji in 
YJQQ 100.4b, 6b, 7a-b, 10b, ija-b; see also Zhu Yueli, “Tianlao kao”). The divine 
light is described in the present book as a spark seen behind the eyelids and represent- 
ing the ability to discern the star Fuxing fffjM (Alcor, 80 Ursae Majoris), the small 
companion of the sixth star of the Big Dipper (preface, ia-b). The loss of this ability is 
said to be an omen of misfortune and— when concomitant with illness— a presaging 
of imminent death (ia-b). 

The book is attributed to Li Jing, the famous general of the Sui (581-618) and early 
Tang (618-907) periods (biographies in Jiu Tang shu 67.2475-83 and Xin Tang shu 
93.3811-17). It is prefaced by a memorial (dated 633), in which Li Jing presents the 
book to Emperor Taizong (r. 626-649). However, the attribution seems to be spuri- 
ous and is absent from the listings of the title in Song bibliographies. The Tongzhi, 
“Yiwen liie” mentions a Cai Deng as author, while the Song shi has a Su Deng 
M (VDL83). 

The first part of the present book (ia-5b) describes the technique of divination 
based on visualization of the Fuxing. Good or bad fortune is determined both ac- 
cording to whether the star is actually seen and according to the color of the light that 
appears. The remainder of the book is entitled “Image of Addressing the Mystery” 
(“Gaoxuan tu pJ S [ill”; 5b-i3b). It contains a method of praying to various stars. 



comprising the presentation of offerings and written petitions, as well as forms of 
“Pacing the Mainstay” ( bugang fj?$pj|). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Zhu Yueli, “Tianlao kao.” 

Poul Andersen 

Taishang laojun taisu jing Jl ^ IS 

2 fols. 

1424 (fasc.1055) 

“Book of the Great Simplicity, by the Most High Lord Lao.” This is a short philo- 
sophical text of uncertain date and authorship. The term taisu jsi ^ refers to the origin 
of the world and relates to the the phase of the beginning of matter. It is an ancient 
term, already present in many early texts, such as the Huainan zi jfl 7P and the 
Tijing apocrypha Qianzuo du A Taisu jing is listed in the bib- 

liographical chapter of the BPZ (19.96). 

The present short text offers itself as an ancient work of philosophy, combining 
various sources such as the Laozi X with excerpts from the appendixes of die Tijing. 

Despite the antiquity of these sources, the text is very likely a modern amalgam. 

Kristofer Schipper 

Taishang zhongdao miaofa lianhua jing Jsi h r f 1 iM fe!' ® 

10 juan 

1432 (fasc. 1058) 

“Scripture of the Lotus of the Marvelous Law of the Central Tao of the Most High.” 
This is a popular pastiche of the Buddhist Lotus sutra, placed at the very beginning 
of the 1607 supplement of the Taoist canon. Its ten juan contain seventeen chapters 
( pin pp ) of very uneven length, some amounting to a single page, others covering a 
full juan. The pastiche superficially borrows a number of chapter titles, terms, and 
concepts from its Buddhist model. The text itself is, however, poorly written, with 
litde or no development either in logic or in narrative. The work is probably the result 
of cmde planchette writing. 

Kristofer Schipper 




[i24*>] 3. B.14 Other Popular Cults 

3.B.14.d Divination Slips 

Sisheng zhenjun lingqian 0 S? ill H It M 

49 fols. 

1298 (fasc. 1010) 

“Oracle Slips of the Four Saintly True Lords.” This is a collection of oracles used 
for divination by means of oracular slips ( baoqian The names of the True Lords 

are mentioned in the introduction (ia). The oracles all issued from Northern Song 
religious movements, notably the Tianxin zhengfa Ti'L'IEl'i ( 1227 Tats hang zhuguo 
jiumin zongzhen biyao 3.10a). A temple was devoted to the True Lords in Luoyang (938 
Xuantian shangdi qisheng lu 2.ub-i3b). Divination through oracular stems was very 
common in the milieus that propagated their cult, and Zhenwu ^ ^ in particular 
usually presided over requests for oracles {1227 Zhuguo jiumin zongzhen biyao 2.i4b-i5a, 
7 -i 3 a-i 4 b). 

The present work can be considered as representative of the lingqian collections 
of the Song (960-1279) period. It is possible that it was the source of 1482 Xuantian 
shangdi baizi shenghao, clearly a later work, as it uses the Yuan (1279-1368) tide Xuan- 
tian shangdi . In any case, both collections spring from the same tradition, 

as is apparent in their introductions (compare ia-b in the present text with 1482 Baizi 
shenghao ib-2a) as well as in the number of oracles (forty-nine in both cases) and the 
text of some oracles. 

Each oracle provides its number, name, and auspicious or inauspicious nature; 1482 
Baizi shenghao also adds the names of two of the seven stars of the Northern Dipper, 
according to an order that explains their total number of forty-nine. Each oracle then 
provides an oracular poem in twelve verses of seven characters, a Holy Advice ( shengyi 
Si ) in prose (in 1482 Baizi shenghao the Holy Advice is in four verses and included 
in the oracular poem), a prognostic passage (zhan £ ) in rhythmic prose, and a final 
poem in four verses of five characters. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Xuanzhen lingying baoqian jH it Hi 1? 

3 juan 

1299 (fasc. ioio-ioii) 

“All-Powerful Oracle Slips of the True Mystery.” This is a collection of oracles used 
in divination by oracular slips ( baoqian ff f§ ). The preface is attributed to the god who 
governed the oracle or who dwelled in the temple where the divination took place 
( wumiao 33 ® i preface ia). His name, Xuanzhen 23 (fit , refers to the Wenchang JC H 
cult and the tradition of the Dadong xianjing ^MfllliM as it appeared in Sichuan 
under the Southern Song (1127-1279; CGF 18). He is also said to have authored the 



3. B.14 Other Popular Cults [ 124 /] 

preface to s Taishang wuji zongzhen Wenchang dadong xianjing (1.1a). The title ap- 
pended to our preface as an edict (goo Ip ; ib-2a) is also included in that work, with 
some variants (2.8a-b, 2.i5b-i6a). 

The factual preface explains that this collection was compiled in answer to the 
growing popularity of divination by oracle slips in the area (Sichuan). It mentions 
several titles of oracle sets that were used for the present compilation. Divination must 
have started to supplant the oniromancy tradition linked to the 169 Qinghe neizhuan 
(ia). Indeed, the Yuan edition of that work in the Daozang opens with the interpreta- 
tion of a dream ( 169 Qinghe neizhuan ib-2a). It also reproduce the title appended to 
the preface of the present work (2b-3a), with more variants than in Dadong xianjing . 
The dating of the present work is thus linked to that of the Qinghe neizhuan. A Yuan 
(1279-1368) date can be considered as likely. 

The 365 oracles all conform to the same pattern: number, name, and auspicious or 
inauspicious verdict, an oracular poem in four verses of five characters, and finally a 
prose comment on the poem. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Daci haosheng jiutian weifang shengmu yuanjun lingying baoqian 

23 fols. 

1300 (fasc. ion) 

“All-Responding Oracle Slips of the Holy Mother Protecting the Bedchamber, 
from the Nine Heavens, Loving Life, and Greatly Compassionate.” This is a collection 
of oracles used in divination by oracle slips ( baoqian Jf f§j ). The Holy Mother protect- 
ing the bedchamber belongs to the pantheon of the Yushu baojing 31 111 0 IS . This 
text is mentioned in several places, in the introduction quoting the passage (99 Jiutian 
yingyuan leisheng puhua tianzun yushu baojing jizhu 2.2a-b) pertaining to the goddess 
as well as in the oracles (21a, 22a, 22b). The date of the present text must therefore be 
1 later than that of the Tushu baojing , pointing to the Southern Song (1127-1279) or Yuan 

(1279-1368) period. 

The Holy Mother is introduced as the deity governing requests for oracles. The 
collection contains ninety-nine oracles. Each of them has a number to match it with 
the slip drawn by the person seeking divination, the oracular poem in four verses of 
seven (sometimes five) characters, and a comment (jie $?) in rhythmic prose. 

Marc Kalinowski 



[ 1248 ] 3 .B. 14 Other Popular Cults 



3 .B. 1 5 Tables of Contents [ 124.9 ] 



Futian guangsheng ruyi lingqian 

61 fols. 

1303 (fasc. 1012) 

“Oracle Slips of the Assembly of Saints Assisting Heaven.” This is a collection of 
oracles used in divination by oracle slips ( lingqian MM)- Nothing in the title nor in 
the contents of the work points to a precise date. Since the other oracle collections 
preserved in th zDaozang were compiled between the Southern Song (1127-1279) and 
the Ming periods (1368-1644), this is likely to be the case also for the present text. 

The 120 oracles are all written according to the same model, giving their number 
and auspicious or inauspicious nature, an oracular text in rhymed prose, and a prog- 
nosis ( zhan £ ), including numbers, dates, and directions to be favored. 

Marc Kalinowski 

Ganzhou Shengji miao lingji li vit TH 

6 fols. 

By Song Lian 5 ^'IS; 137 1 

1304 (fasc. 1012) 

Huguo Jiaji Jiangdong wang lingqian M. Pi M (T ili-E if M 

41 fols. 

By Fu Ye var. Fu Yu f#® ; 1225-1227 

1305 (fasc. 1012) 

“Miraculous Events at the Shengji Temple in Ganzhou.” Song Lian’s inscription 
concerning this tide, dated 1371 (cf. the more comprehensive version in Song Wenxian 
gong quanji 4), serves here as an introduction to the text of the well- 

known divination series ( lingqian MM) of the god Prince East of the River (Jiang- 
dong wang fl^I) and provides details about the historical development of the cult 
from which the oracle originated. 

Tradition had it that the local hero Shi Gu DU from Ganzhou j'H (southern 
Jiangxi) manifested his divine power for the first time in 196 B.c. by helping the general 
GuanYingfllSS to subdue Zhao Tuo H under the Han. In a.d. 847, a certain Wen 
Liang Uf] (Song’s Quanji reads “Zhou Liang III Jiajing Ganzhou fuzhi 6.30 has 
“Zhou Cheng IH founded the historical temple east of the river Gong H'/I, from 

which the popular name for the deity, Jiangdong wang, was derived. As the cult grew 
dur ing the following centuries, it received numerous official honors. Song mentions 
the renaming of the temple from Jiaji miao H to Shengji miao is!#?)#! under the 

Song emperors (between 1056 and 1064, according to the Jiajing Ganzhou fuzhi) and 
the bestowal of the epithet huguo M H under the Yuan dynasty {Ganzhou fuzhi gives 
1334 as the date). Between 1225 and 1227, a certain Fu Ye (the Quanji reads “Fu Yu”) 



from Putian flf EH (Fujian), who held a military post in the subprefecture Gan 
wrote a series of a hundred divinatory verses {yaoci ), which immensely increased 
the cult’s popularity. The assumption that the present lingqian (one hundred poems 
of four heptasyllabic lines each) are identical with Fu’s oracles seems justified on the 
grounds of the corresponding number of verses. The appended explanations (fie M ) 
and exegesis of their “holy meaning” ( shengyi M ) — the latter again being poems of 

eight lines of three characters each— are possibly of a later date. 

Song Lian’s inscription for the temple in Ganzhou was composed a few years after 
MingTaizu (r. 1368-1398) had decreed that an official representative should attend the 
temple festivities on every eighth day of the first month (according to the Ganzhou 
fuzhi, the decree was issued in 1368). 

Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 



Tables of Contents 

if 

Daozang quejing mulu HI @ 

2 juan 

Compiled by the editors of the Da Ming Daozang jing; fifteenth century 

1430 (fasc. 1056) 

“Catalogue of the Missing Books in the DaozangV When the editors of the Zheng- 
tong canon had finished their work, they drew up a fist of titles included in previous 
Taoist canons but no longer extant. The catalogue comprised 794 titles (VDL 62). The 
editors made this list, according to a note placed under the title, on the basis of an old 
catalogue ( yujiu mulu nei chaochu Mfil-tP Hi )• Which list or lists they may have 

used has been the subject of debate. The compilers did not reproduce the material at 
their disposal, as had been done in previous canons (see the present text 2.21a) and as 
was also regularly done in Buddhist canons. There is likely to have been a reason for 
this omission. Whatever it may be, the list of “lost works” is a most important source 
for the study of Taoist bibliography. 

1 Chen Yuan |Jjf? Js (Nan Song chu Hebei xin daojiao kao , 28 ) has argued that the editors 

of the bAmgDaozang of 1445 based their fisting of lost works solely on the comparison 
with the catalogue of the very last canon to be compiled before their own, that is, the 
Xuandu baozang of 1244, compiled by the Quanzhen ^ (If order under the 

direction of Song Defang (1183-1247). Chen’s argument is based on the following 
evidence: In an epitaph for the Quanzhen patriarch Qin Zhian (1188-1247), 

who, as a disciple of Song Defang had participated actively in the editing, the Yuan 




[ 1250 ] 3 . B. 15 Tables of Contents 

scholar Yuan Haowen TCfcFfnj (1190-1257) wrote that at the very end of the canon, 
Qin added four historical works written by himself, the 173 Jinlian zhengzong ji t 5 z H 
JEtfcbE, the Tanxia lu MMfsk, the Tixian zhuan UHlllfH, and the Wuxian zhuan 
{[IlfU (see Tongzhen zi muji mtng 3i.i2a-i3b). The present catalogue lists at the very 
end (2.21a) three of the above-named works that are not in the Ming Daozang. In sup- 
port of Chen Yuan’s argument it could be said that on the same last page we have the 
titles of the lost catalogues of the former Song (960-1279) and Jurchen Jin (1115-1234) 
canons, while that of the Yuan (1279-1368) canon is not mentioned. Thus the editors 
of the MingDaozang did have access to it, but did not reproduce it other than through 
this checklist of missing titles. Against Chen’s hypothesis, however, stands the fact that 
between the three Quanzhen historical works, the Quejing mulu inserts an altogether 
different title, that of a Wushan Hutmglu dazhai jingyao iff U l ft li ^ Ilffit §1 ( wushan 

ill is an error for wushang iff _h). This tide probably does not come from the same 
Yuan canon catalogue, but must have been taken from another inventory. So the com- 
pilers of the Quejing mulu must at least have had two catalogues at their disposal. 

In his detailed discussion of the compilation of the Yuan canon of 1244 (which 
he calls a “reprint”) and its subsequent destruction by Kublai Khan in 1281, van der 
Loon argues that the editors had several catalogues, or fragments of catalogues, at 
their disposal, since the shelflist of the imperial library of 1441 contains a number of 
“Taoist Catologues.” One of these catalogues was of the Taoist books actually shelved 
in that library. Another was a single fascicle with “several lists of the Taoist canon.” 
Still another was a work in ten fascicles (VDL 61-62). It therefore is probable that the 
editors did indeed use several different catalogues, which may explain a number of 
inconsistencies and errors signaled by van der Loon. 

Still, it would seem that the main source used by the compilers of the Ming canon 
for their verification was the catalogue of the Yuan canon of 1244. We may be certain 
that they had it at their disposal, and it is tempting to suppose that the one large list in 
ten fascicles in the imperial library was that. This hypothesis is strengthened by the fact 
that, as an appendix to the Quejing mulu, we find the text of an inscription dated 1275 
and named “Short Inventory of the Taoist Canons through the Ages” ( Daozang zun- 
jing lidai gcmgmu H ), which must have been placed at the Yongle 

gong temple in Shanxi where Song Defang was abbot and from where he 

directed the compilation of the 1244 canon. The inscription is very much to the glory 
of his enterprise and of his canon, the printing blocks of which were kept in the Yongle 
gong temple. It is logical that the text of such an inscription would have been added 
to the catalogue of the 1244 canon. 

The logic of the above hypothesis is important, inasmuch as the Quejing mulu 
does show a pattern in the way it lists the lost Taoist works. Indeed, it clearly follows 
the classification of the Three Caverns and Four Auxiliaries of the previous canons. 



3 .B .15 Tables of Contents [ 1251 ] 

Beginning on page ia and numbering the titles in sequence, we find the following in 
juan 1: 

• Numbers 1 through 32 (ia-2bs) are Dongzhen M H texts. 

• Numbers 33 through 45 (2b6-3a9) are Dongxuanj[B] texts. 

• Numbers 46 through 103 (3aio-6b2) are also Dongzhen texts. 

• Numbers 104 through 109, on 6b, are miscellaneous entries (such as the 

Xiang’erzhu of the Laozi and catalogues such as the Sui Tuweijingmu 

3i. If If Hi and the Tang Sandong qionggang H ?[§] if M ; see CGF 112-14). 

• Numbers no through 229 (6b8-i3a7) are again Dongxuan texts. 

• Numbers 230 through 234 (i3a-b) are miscellaneous texts on divination. 

• Numbers 235 through 298 (i3b4-i6b6) are Dongshen texts. 

• Numbers 299 through 388 at the end of juan 1 (21a) are Taixuan bu 

p|J texts, many beginning with Laozi’s Song-period canonical title Taishang 
hunyuan shangde huangdi iv _h tH jt 1 ^ (at the end of this part, we find 

many doctrinal and polemical works as well as hagiographies). 

Coming now to juan 2, we see that it continues with the listing of hagiographical 
texts, the last being a monograph on Qingcheng shan WM ill (no. 404). This part of 
the Taixuan bu therefore covers more than a hundred tides (299 to 404). 

• Number 405 is the Tiqie daojing yinyi — '©jlfSef H (see 1123 Tiqie daojing 
yinyi miaomen youqi). 

• Numbers 406 and 407 are Taiqing bu jsi fR u|i works, standing wrongly just 
before 408 and 409. 

• Numbers 408 and 409, the Taiping bu scriptures. The Taipingjing 

itself is listed as lost (see noia Taipingjing) 

• Numbers 410 through 500 are all Taiqing bu texts, some marked as such, 
others clearly related to alchemy, Tending Life, and so on, including Inner 
Alchemy texts inspired by the Ccmtong qi (e.g., 459, on page 4b2). 

• Numbers 501 through 557 are texts from the Zhengyi bu IE — •*[(. 

The remainder of the list is filled with titles of books that are mostly from later 
periods, comprising even some Southern Song (1127-1279) works, and listed without 
any apparent order. These may have been the works that had no direct relationship 
with the traditional Seven Divisions and were therefore placed at the end of the canons 
as a supplement. 

To conclude, although there are some manifest overlappings and irregularities and 
the use of at least two and probably more catalogues is evident, the Quejing mulu fol- 
lows in general the subdivision of the Three Caverns and Four Auxiliaries, and large 
parts are composed of works of a single category. Within these, the Dongxuan division 



[ I 2 f 2 ] 3.B. 15 Tables of Contents 



3.B. 15 Tables of Contents [ I2S3 ] 



stands out as the largest, with 127 texts, followed by the Taixuan (105), the Taiqing 
(90), and the Dongzhen divisions (89). As always, the Dongshen division is small and 
the Taiping division amounts to almost nothing. As to the size of the Zhengyi divi- 
sion, as in the Ming canon, coming at the very end, it has been enlarged by many later 
additions. 

Although in some instances texts of a certain type are grouped together, such as 
hagiographies, rules of conduct, and “discussions” ( lun |if ), there is no trace of a sub- 
division in Twelve Categories (Shi’er lei H ) as we find in the Ming canon. The 
Quejing mulu does give us a key to the original organization of the Taoist canons, as 
they were organized and structured from the times of Wang Yan at the end of the 
fifth century until the Yuan canon of 1244. It is thus an invaluable and hitherto largely 
untapped source for the study of Taoist bibliography. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Chen Yuan, Nan Song chu Hebei xin daojiao kao; Ozaki Masaharu, “ Dow ketsukyd mokuroku 
kanken.” 

Kristofer Schipper 

Da Ming Daozang jing mulu k Bfj jilt ^ IS @ it 

Xu Daozang jing mulu HtjH U Mk 

4 juan 

1431 (fasc. 1057) 

“Table of Contents of the Taoist Canon of the Great Ming.” This listing stands at 
the very end of the Zhengtong canon of 1445, whereas that of the Wanli supplement 
of 1607 stands at the very beginning of the Xu Daozang $fj jf jj§c . There is no possibility 
of confusion between the two since the typography is strikingly different, in keeping 
with the graphic forms of the characters prevalent in the respective parts. The colo- 
phon at the end of the two tables of contents by the Fiftieth Heavenly Master, Zhang 
Guoxiang dated 1607, therefore applies to the contents of the supplement 

only. 

The table of contents of the Zhengtong canon is preceeded by a short text entitled 
“Origins of Taoism” ( Daojiao zongyuan an introduction to the genesis 

and structure of the Daoist canon. It can therefore be considered as the preface to the 
Daozang. It is followed by even shorter “instructions for use” (fanli J'Lf^lJ). 

The introduction makes the origin of the canon coequal with that of the uni- 
verse: 

How remote! The beginning of the Family of the Tao ( Daojia M'M)- It started 

from where there was nothing before; it manifested itself in response to stimulus; 



it was born from the Marvelous One. From this Marvelous One came the division 
into Three Principles. These Three Principles transformed into the Three Qi [ener- 
gies], and these again transformed into the Three Kinds [Heaven, Earth, and Life], 
The Three Kinds then began to give birth and the ten-thousand beings attained 
their fullness. 

The Three Principles . . . produced the Lord of Heavenly Treasure, the Lord of 

Marvelous Treasure, and the Lord of Divine Treasure They reigned over the 

Three Pure Regions, which are Jade Purity, Supreme Purity and Most High Purity, 
also named the Three Heavens. . . . But as the [318] Jiutian shengshen zhangjing 
says: “Although these names are different, their foundation is One. These Three 
Lords are also die chief teachers of the Three Caverns. They are the Dongzhen, 
the Dongxuan, and the Dongshen . . . , each containing twelve divisions. From 
the Three Caverns sprang the Four Auxiliaries, Taixuan, Taiping, Taiqing, and 
Zhengyi. 

And so the canon came into being. The introduction then sets forth explanations 
of the division, of the works included in each of the Three Caverns, and into Twelve 
Categories (shi’er lei + going to great lengths to justify the need for each of 

them. The fanli does likewise, adding concrete examples. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ozaki Masaharu, “Dozo mokuroku shochu kanken.” 

Kristofer Schipper and Tuan Bingling 




CONTENTS 



kristofer schipper was, until his retirement in 2003, professor of Chinese 
Religions at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes and professor of Chinese History 
at Leiden University; he currently is director of the Library of the Western Belvedere 
at the University of Fuzhou. 

franciscus verellen is director of the Ecole Fran^aise d’Extreme-Orient, where 
he holds the chair in History of Taoism. 

The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637 
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London 
© 2004 by The University of Chicago 
All rights reserved. Published 2004 
Printed in the United States of America 
13 12 u 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 54321 

isbn (cloth, vol. 2): 0-226-73813-2 
ISBN (the set): 0-226-73817-5 

Published with the generous assistance of the Chiang Ching-Kuo Foundation for 
International Scholarly Exchange. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Dao Zang. 

The Taoist canon : a historical companion to the Daozang = [Dao zang tong kao] 
3 v. ; cm. 

Parallel title in Chinese characters. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

Contents: vol. 1. Antiquity through the Middle Ages / edited by Kristofer 
Schipper and Franciscus Verellen— vol. 2. The modem period / edited by Kristofer 
Schipper and Franciscus Verellen— vol. 3. Biographies, bibliography, indexes / 
edited by Kristofer Schipper and Franciscus Verellen. 

ISBN 0-226-73817-5 (set : alk. paper) —ISBN 0-226-73811-6 (v. 1 : alk. paper) — 
ISBN 0-226-73813-2 (v. 2 : alk. paper) —ISBN 0-226-73815-9 (v. 3 : alk. paper) 

1. Dao Zang. 2. Taoism. I. Tide: Dao zang tong kao. II. Schipper, Kristofer 
Marinus. III. Verellen, Franciscus. IV. Tide 
BL1900.A1D359 2004 

299.5'i482— dc22 2004047959 

This book is printed on acid-free paper. 



VOLUME 2 

List of Illustrations vii 

Summary Contents of Volumes 1 and 3 xi 

List of Contributors xiii 

part 3: The Song, Yuan, and Ming 
Introduction: Taoism in the Early Modern Era 633 
3-A Texts in General Circulation 640 
3. A. 1. Philosophy 640 

3.A.i.a Commentaries on Ancient Philosophers 640 
3.A.i.a.iTh cDaodejing 640 
3.A.i.a.2 The Zhuangzi 671 
3.A.I. a. 3 The Liezi 682 
3.A.i.a.4 Others 68 s 

3.A.i.b Commentaries on the Yinfujing 691 
3.A.1.C Commentaries on the Zhouyi cantong qi and 
Related Scriptures 701 

3.A.i.d Commentaries on Zhengyi, Shangqing, and 
Lingbao Scriptures 706 
3.A.i.e Treatises and Essays 73 S 
3.A.2 Divination and Numerology 746 
3.A.3 Medicine and Pharmacology 76s 
3.A.4 Neidan and Yangsbeng 779 

3.A.4.a General Works and Manuals 780 
3.A.4.b The Zhong-Lii Tradition 801 

3.A.4.cThe Wuzhen piem and the Southern School (Nanzong) 
3.A.4.d Other Neidan Traditions 840 
3.A.5 Alchemy 8so 

3.A.6 Sacred History and Geography 870 

3.A.6.a Sacred Histories and Records 870 
3.A.6.b Hagiographies 884 
3.A.6.C Mountain and Temple Monographs 909 
3.A.7 Collectanea 924 

3.A.7.a Logia (' Yulu ) 924 
3.A.7.b Collected Works 931 
3.A.8 Handbooks and Anthologies 942 



[ vi ] Contents 



■B Texts in Internal Circulation 949 
3.B.1 Zhengyi 949 

3-B.i.a Scriptures pji 
3-B.i.b Lamp Rituals 962 
3.B.1.C Registers and Talismans 971 
3.B.i.d Miscellanea 973 
3.B.2 Sanhuang 97s 
3.B.3 Lingbao 981 

3-B.3.a Scriptures 982 
3.B.3.b Litanies 992 
3.B.3.C Rituals 99s 
3. B. 3.d Manuals 1010 
3.B.3X Hymnology 1039 
3.B.4 Shangqing 1042 

3. B.4.a Scriptures 1043 
3.B.4.b Registers io$3 
3.B.4.C Rituals 1056 

3.B.5 Tianxin Zhengfa and Related Rites ios6 
3.B.6 Shenxiao Fa and Related Thunder Rites 1081 
3.B.7 The Qingwei School 109s 
3.B.8 The Jingming Zhongxiao School ins 
3.B.9 The Quanzhen Order 1127 

3.B.9.a Hagiography and Biography 1134 
3-B.9.b Logia and Collected Works 1142 
3.B.9.C Rules and Organization 1167 
3-B.9.d Individual Practice 1171 
3.B.10 The Beidi and Xuantian Shangdi Cult 1188 
3-B.ii The Wenchang Cult 1203 
3.B.12 The Hongen Lingji Zhenjun Cult 1210 
3.B.13 The Zhenyuan Scriptures 1216 
3.B.14 Other Popular Cults 1223 

3.B.i4.a Scriptures of Popular Cults 1224 
3-B.i4.b The Cult of the Northern Dipper 1230 
3.B.14.C Popular Rites 123s 
3-B.i4.d Divination Shps 1246 
Tables of Contents 1249 



ILLUSTRATIONS 



1. Projection of the Twenty-eight Lunar Mansions onto the human body (723 

1. 6a) 662 

2. Instruments for Heavenly Music (103 1.22b) 709 

3. The circulation of yin and yang in the body: A metaphorical representation of 

the Inner Landscape (90 “ biao ,” 8a-b) 717 

4. The correspondence between respiration and the circulation of qi and the 

movement of the Big Dipper stars ( 93 1.6a) 721 

5. Portrait of Yin Xi ( 667 ia) 737 

6. A integral representation of the Great Ultimate ( IS7 1.1a) 746 

7. The Hexagram Ju, “Regeneration” (138 2.25a) 747 

8. Man positioned between Heaven and Earth ( 162 2.1a) 749 

9. The River Chart, a drawing by Lei Siqi ( 1013 ia) 751 

10. Cloud formations and haloes for meteorological forecasts (127s 3b-4a, 4b-5a, 

and 5b-6a) 7S3 

11. Two techniques for winning salt from sea water (769 3.7b-9a and 9a-b) 768 

12. A furnace for making mercury (769 3.22b) 769 

13. Fabulous mushrooms of immortality (1406 2a, 21b, 30a, 62a) 770 

14. Arrangement of the Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches on the hand ( 1022 

1.2a) 772 

15. The Inner Landscape ( 1024 “Xulun,” 4a-b) 773 

16. Insects and worms in the human body ( 1164 10. 6b) 776 

1 7. Loci for moxibustion ( 1164 11.20a) 777 

18. Sores and rashes (116s 9-9b and ioa-b) 778 

19. The baduanjin or Eight Lengths of Brocade method ( 263 i9.4a-5b) 800 

20. The Ten Islands of the Blessed, for visualization in meditation ( 149 8a) 803 

21. Allegory of the sublimation of yin energy in Inner Alchemy ( 240 2.13a) 829 

22. The being of light rising from its mortal body (iS4 10a) 830 

23. Heaven and Earth, to be visualized in the first stage of the inner recreation of the 

universe ( isi 2b) 833 

24. Yin and yang, with the vessels of reproduction (rji 3a-b) 833 

25. Maintaining the immortal principle ( isi I3b-i4a) 834 

26. The crucible with the different stages of the alchemical process (252 2.2a) 847 

27. Water as the primordial element and its devolution (252 2.9a) 847 

28. Illustration of Returning to the Root (279 3b) 848 

29. The alchemical altar ( 900 5b) 866 



[ viii ] Illustrations 



Illustrations [ ix ] 



30. A furnace for the extraction of mercury ( 900 7a) 866 

31. Instructions for making and loading alchemical vessels (914 3b-4-a) 868 

32. Yu Huang and the Thirty-two Heavens (iss iob-nb) 876 

33. The Controller of Fate, Jiutian siming (r# 6b-7a) 876 

34. Gengsang zi ( 163 2b) 894 

35. Zhuangzi (163 8a) 894 

36. Xu Xun fighting mountain spirits (440 i.i9b-2oa) 900 

37. Xu Xun smelting the iron pillar ( 440 2.7b-8b) 900 

38. Xu Xun rising up to Heaven (440 2.i7b-i8a) 900 

39. Lii Dongbin with his birth and ascension dates (1484 1.1b) 937 

40. Diagram illustrating the fundamental unity of the Three Teachings (1066 1.7a) 939 

41. The buffalo and its Precious Chariot ( 1066 i.ioa-b) 939 

42. Exorcist with a sword and a bowl of charm water ( 1217 2a-b) 972 

43. Diagrams for the construction of the altar ( so8 2.2a, 4a-b) 1016 

44. Emissaries conveying memorials to Heaven, with spirit guides ( so8 39.16b- 

17a) 1016 

45. True Map of the Fengdu underworld ( so8 40.5b) 1016 

46. Funerary banner for summoning and guiding the soul (466 292.14b) 1036 

47. Flying to the moon on a phoenix (43s 12a) 1049 

48. Meditating Taoist (67$ 3a) ios4 

49. Vestments (67s 3b-4a) ios 4 

50. Meditation on the Dipper while reclining (67s 4b-sa) loss 

51. Jade Maidens (67s 7b-8a) loss 

52. Talisman of Heisha (s66 3.6b) 1066 

53. Portrait of Laozi as Undifferentiated Beginning ( 1277 1.4a) 1080 

54. Female deity holding the register ( 1219 11.35a) 1094 

55. The Inner Structure, showing the Cinnabar Field and the spinal column (278 

8b) 1104 

56. Primordial Revelation and the Secret Sounds of the Qingwei ( 1220 4-ia-b) 1107 

57. “Seal of the Most High Pure and Clear (Jingming) Order” and “Seal of the 

Master of Rites of the Jingming School” (SS9 2a) 1119 

58. Choreography of the Flying Steps ( s6i 8b) 1120 

59. Portrait of the immortal Lii Dongbin ( 174 15b) 1137 

60. Wang Zhe, the founder of the Quanzhen order ( 174 18a) 1137 

61. Qiu Chuji, Taoist ambassador to Genghis Khan ( 174 32a) 1137 

62. Mind and Mystery, as the foundations of the alchemical process ( 1074 1.1a) 1149 

63. Essence, Energy, Spirit: The three elements of Inner Alchemy (244 2.13a) 1171 

64. Practitioner preparing to eradicate the Roots of Impermanence (267 1.1b) 1176 

65. Steps in Taming the Horse of the Mind (267 i.2a-9a) 1177 



66. The progressive and regressive dynamics of the Great Ultimate and the 

materialization of the Original Qi as a landscape (1068 3a) 1182 

67. Dragon and tiger as alchemical symbols ( 1068 8a) 1183 

68. The Skiff of Salvation, for crossing to immortality (242 5a) 1186 

69. The Emperor of the Pole Star ( 121s 8b-9a) 1197 

70. Xuantian zhenwu ( 1213 ib) 1198 

71. Apparition of Xuantian shangdi above the summit of Wudang shan in 1413 ( 9 S 9 

i6a-b) 1201 

72. Wenchang dijun and his acolytes ( 1214 i.ib-2a) 1209 

73. Stellar guardian ( 1214 2.13b) 1209 

74. Auspicious dream images ( 1214 3.nb-i2b) 1210 

75. Cultivating immortality through the sublimation of the True Person (437 

*iob) 1220 

76. Officiant going to audience at the Golden Portal ( 437 12b) 1220 

77. Mount Taishan (441 17b— 18a) 1237 

78. Map of Mount Xuanpu (s 8 o 3.16a) 1243 




SUMMARY CONTENTS OF VOLUMES I AND 3 



VOLUME I 

part i: Eastern Zhou to Six Dynasties 
i. A Texts in General Circulation 

1. B Texts in Internal Circulation 
part 2: The Sui, Tang, and Five Dynasties 

2. A Texts in General Circulation 
2.B Texts in Internal Circulation 

VOLUME 3 

Biographical Notices: Frequendy Mentioned Taoists 
Bibliography 

Abbreviations 
Primary Sources 
Secondary Sources 
About the Contributors 
Indexes 

Classified Tide Index 
Work Number Index 
Pinyin Tide Index 

Finding List for Other Daozang Editions 
General Index 




CONTRIBUTORS 



Denis Allistone 
Poul Andersen 
Farzeen Baldrian-Hussein 
Lidia Bonomi 
Alfredo Cadonna 
Ursula-Angelika Cedzich 
Catherine Despeux 
Adrianus Dudink 
Fang Ling 
Vincent Goossaert 



Caroline Gyss-Vermande 
Marc Kalinowski 
Terry Kleeman 
Pauline Bentley Koffler 
t Kwong Hing Foon 
John Lagerwey 
Alessandra Lavagnino 
Jean Levi 

Jan A. M. De Meyer 
Christine Mollier 



Fabrizio Pregadio 
Florian C. Reiter 
+ Isabelle Robinet 
Kristofer Schipper 
Hans-Hermann Schmidt 
Nathan Sivin 
Franciscus Verellen 
Giovanni Vitiello 
Yuan Bingling 













































































part 3 

The Song, Yuan, 






